Its  chief  village  was  Bucklebury, 
clustering  in  the  banks  and  slopes  behind  Brandy  Hall.
If  you  want  to  know,  I  am  just  writing  an 
ending  for  it.
The  eighth  night  of  their  journey  came.
Under  the  shadow  of 
bushes  leaning  out  over  the  water  they  halted  and  drew 
breath.
Then  turning  south  again  he  beheld 
Minas  Tirith.
‘Are  you  sure 
that  you  do  not  suffer  needlessly?’  he  said.
‘It  is  the  morning  of  October  the  twenty- 
fourth,  if  you  want  to  know.’ 

‘Gandalf !’  criedFrodo,  sittingup.
Your  ring  is  shown  to  be  that  One  Ring  by  the  fire¬ 
writing  alone,  apart  from  any  other  evidence.’ 

‘And  when  did  you  discover  that?’  asked  Frodo,  inter¬ 
rupting.
If  Gandalf  was  anywhere  about, 
there  was  no  sign  of  him.
The  sun 
grew  misty  as  the  day  grew  old,  until  it  gleamed  in  a  pale  sky 
like  a  high  white  pearl.
And  he  asked  urgently  concerning 
hobbits ,  of  what  land  they  were,  and  where  they  dwelt.
Their  Captain  remained  in  secret  away  south  of 
Bree,  while  two  rode  ahead  through  the  village,  and  four 
more  invaded  the  Shire.
When  we  do,  I  hope  you  will  explain  what  happened 
at  the  end  of  your  song.
They  found  a  passage  between  two  hills  that  led 
them  into  a  valley  running  south-east,  the  direction  that  they 
wished  to  take;  but  towards  the  end  of  the  day  they  found 
their  road  again  barred  by  a  ridge  of  high  land;  its  dark  edge 
against  the  sky  was  broken  into  many  bare  points  like  teeth 
of  a  blunted  saw.
It  is  I  that  must  hasten  away, 
and  he  that  must  remain.’ 

The  Company  now  went  down  the  road  from  the  Gates.
‘What’s  that?’ 

‘It  is  a  hill,  just  to  the  north  of  the  Road,  about  half  way 
from  here  to  Rivendell.
‘Whatever 
it  was,  its  fall  has  dismayed  our  enemies.’ 

‘So  it  seems,’  said  Aragorn.
This  only  would  he  say,  that  Imladris  was  of  old 
the  name  among  the  Elves  of  a  far  northern  dale,  where 
Elrond  the  Halfelven  dwelt,  greatest  of  lore -masters.
I  wish  you  would  trust  me,  as  you  used.’  He  turned 
away,  and  the  shadow  passed.
Seeing  is  both  good  and  perilous.
Well,  that’s  over,’  he 
said  in  a  low  voice.
While  the  others 
were  unrolling  blankets  and  malting  beds  against  the  walls  of 
the  chamber,  as  far  as  possible  from  the  hole  in  the  floor,  he 
crept  to  the  edge  and  peered  over.
‘We  still  have  our  journey  and  our  errand  before  us,’ 
answered  Gandalf.
‘If  we  make  as  good  going  this 
afternoon  as  we  have  done  this  morning,  we  shall  have  left 
the  Downs  before  the  Sun  sets  and  be  jogging  on  in  search 
of  a  camping  place.’  But  even  as  he  spoke  he  turned  his 
glance  eastwards,  and  he  saw  that  on  that  side  the  hills  were 
higher  and  looked  down  upon  them;  and  all  those  hills  were 
crowned  with  green  mounds,  and  on  some  were  standing 
stones,  pointing  upwards  like  jagged  teeth  out  of  green  gums.
Hill  and  water  under  sky, 

Pass  them  by!
When  they  reached  the  top  they  saw  that  they  could  go  no 
further  that  way,  and  the  reason  for  the  drying  up  of  the 
Gate-stream  was  revealed.
Upon  the  west  to  their  right  the  land  was  treeless  also,  but 
it  was  flat,  and  in  many  places  green  with  wide  plains  of 
grass.
‘He  thinks  I  need  keeping  in  order.
‘Knock  on  the  doors  with  your  head,  Peregrin  Took,’  said 
Gandalf.
Lots  of  folk  were  busily  at  work.
Your  hand’s  more  fair 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  1 75 

without  it.
Wandering  aimlessly  at  first  in  the  wood,  Frodo  found  that 
his  feet  were  leading  him  up  towards  the  slopes  of  the  hill.
Then 
their  hearts  rose;  for  it  seemed  plain  that  they  had  come 
further  already  than  they  had  expected.
He  saw  his  friends’  faces  more  clearly  again,  and  a  measure 
of  new  hope  and  strength  returned.
They  went  on.
It  is  the  only  way  of  getting  off  without 
being  followed  at  once.
At 
Aragorn’s  bidding  they  paddled  now  for  long  spells,  and  the 
banks  went  swiftly  by.
Suddenly  Bilbo  looked  up.
But  the  snow  did  not  relent.
Both  of  them  felt  restless  again.
The  boat  slipped  into  the  water.
Suddenly  they  came  out  into  the  open  again  and  found 
themselves  under  a  pale  evening  sky  pricked  by  a  few  early 
stars.
In  those  days  no  other  Men  had  settled  dwellings  so  far 
west,  or  within  a  hundred  leagues  of  the  Shire.
He  comes  of  age  and  into  his  inheritance 
today.
‘They’ll  be  hunting  for  me,’  he  said.
Now  see  him  off!”  They  chased  me  all  the  way  to 
the  Ferry.
Therefore  I  advise  that  we  should  go  neither  over 
the  mountains,  nor  round  them,  but  under  them.
‘I 
can’t  stay  here,’  he  said  wildly.
Indeed  I  have  heard  that  for  them 
memory  is  more  like  to  the  waking  world  than  to  a  dream.
Maggot?
There  were  also  abominable  creatures  haunting  the  reeds  and 
tussocks  that  from  the  sound  of  them  were  evil  relatives  of  the 
cricket.
Yet  even  so,  as  Ring-bearer  and  as 
one  that  has  borne  it  on  finger  and  seen  that  which  is  hidden, 
your  sight  is  grown  keener.
Sam  was  standing  by  the  pony,  sucking  his  teeth,  and 
staring  moodily  into  the  gloom  where  the  river  roared  stonily 
below;  his  desire  for  adventure  was  at  its  lowest  ebb.
‘Would  it 
please  you  to  climb  with  me  up  Cerin  Amroth?’ 

They  followed  him  as  he  stepped  lightly  up  the  grass-clad 
slopes.
‘All  is  now  ready  for  you.
The  floor  was  flagged,  and  strewn  with  fresh  green 
rushes.
May  it  serve 
you  well!’ 

‘Come!’  said  Haldir.
Looking 
down  after  him  Frodo  saw  him  running  away  southwards 
along  the  green  hollow  between  their  hill  and  the  next,  still 
whistling  and  crying: 

Hey!
I  am  not  sure  that  I  want  to  come  out  into  the  open  yet.’ 

They  went  on  for  perhaps  another  couple  of  miles.
‘And  perils 
known  and  unknown  will  grow  as  we  go  on.
He  had  a  natural  mistrust 


122 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


of  the  inhabitants  of  other  parts  of  the  Shire;  and  also  he  was 
not  disposed  to  be  quick  friends  with  anyone  who  had  beaten 
his  master,  however  long  ago.
They  must  be  small  and  light,  for  if 
you  go  far  by  water,  there  are  places  where  you  will  be  forced 
to  carry  them.
There  were  several  Underhills  from  Staddle,  and  as 
they  could  not  imagine  sharing  a  name  without  being  related, 
they  took  Frodo  to  their  hearts  as  a  long-lost  cousin.
He  paused  for  a  moment.
Frodo  had  retired  for  a  while  and  left  his  friend 
Merry  Brandybuck  to  keep  an  eye  on  things.
One  would  have  thought  that  nothing 
dangerous  or  dreadful  had  happened;  and  indeed  the  horror 
faded  out  of  their  hearts  as  they  looked  at  him,  and  saw  the 
merry  glint  in  his  eyes.
Bag  End  seemed  sad  and  gloomy  and 
dishevelled.
The  Brandywine  flowed  slow  and  broad  before  them.
It’s  a  pity:  for  I’ve  missed  a  good  friend.
He  is  the 
chief  of  my  order  and  the  head  of  the  Council.
‘Ah  yes,  I  recognized  the 
name.
The  River  is  at 
least  a  path  that  cannot  be  missed.’ 


508  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

‘But  the  Enemy  holds  the  eastern  bank,’  objected  Boromir.
“I  have  come  for  your  aid, 
Saruman  the  White.”  And  that  title  seemed  to  anger  him.
The  hobbit-rooms  have 
windows  looking  north  and  close  to  the  ground.
I  knew  Bilbo,  too.
There  was  a  gasp  of  astonishment 
from  the  hobbits,  and  then  even  Frodo  laughed.
What  his  right  name  is 
I’ve  never  heard:  but  he’s  known  round  here  as  Strider.
They  did  not  go  far,  for  on  the 
floor  lay  many  old  bones,  and  nothing  else  was  to  be  seen 
near  the  entrance  except  some  great  empty  jars  and  broken 
pots.
I  will  answer  some  of  your  questions,  if  that  will  help 
you  to  do  so.
‘I  like  that!’  said  Sam.
Vanish  in  the  sunlight!
‘I  guess  that  it  began  with 
their  coming  to  Dimrill  Dale  nigh  on  thirty  years  ago:  the 
pages  seem  to  have  numbers  referring  to  the  years  after  their 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  KHAZAD-DUM  419 

arrival.
Mr.
Together  they  led  the  Company  back 
towards  the  mountains.
They 
seemed  to  pick  up  some  scent,  and  they  searched  the  ground 
for  a  while  near  the  place  where  you  halted.
help!
Let’s  get  indoors  and  then  we  can  talk.’ 

‘All  right!
The 
Nine  have  been  unhorsed  indeed,  but  that  is  but  a  respite, 
ere  they  find  new  steeds  and  swifter.
‘Bilbo!’  cried  Frodo  with  sudden  recognition,  and  he 
sprang  forward.
And  who  are  they  to  be?
And  this  I  will  say  to  you,  Boromir, 
ere  I  end.
‘If  you  had  warned  me,  or  even 
sent  me  a  message,  I  would  have  done  away  with  it.’ 

‘Would  you?
‘Gloin 
at  your  service,’  he  said,  and  bowed  still  lower.
It  had  been  slashed 
and  stabbed  and  partly  burned,  and  it  was  so  stained  with 
black  and  other  dark  marks  like  old  blood  that  little  of  it 
could  be  read.
Often  they  heard  nearby  Elvish  voices  singing,  and  knew  that 
they  were  making  songs  of  lamentation  for  his  fall,  for  they 
caught  his  name  among  the  sweet  sad  words  that  they  could 
not  understand.
“Well,  I  see  that  this  wise  course  does  not  commend  itself 
to  you,”  he  said.
Naur  dan  i  ngaurhothF  he  cried.
But  even  the  deafest  and  most  stay-at-home  began 
to  hear  queer  tales;  and  those  whose  business  took  them  to  the 
borders  saw  strange  things.
They 
were  now  silent,  and  as  the  last  Elf  passed  he  turned  and 
looked  towards  the  hobbits  and  laughed.
The  sun  got  up,  the 
clouds  vanished,  flags  were  unfurled  and  the  fun  began.
Laboriously  they  climbed  a  sharp  slope  and  halted  for  a 
moment  at  the  top.
The  Inn  of  Bree  was  still  there,  however,  and  the  innkeeper 
was  an  important  person.
But  I  don’t  know 
quite  how  to  begin.’ 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED  135 

‘I  think  I  could  help  you,’  said  Merry  quietly,  ‘by  telling 
you  some  of  it  myself.’ 

‘What  do  you  mean?’  said  Frodo,  looking  at  him  anxiously.
I  say  to  you,  Frodo,  that  even 
as  I  speak  to  you,  I  perceive  the  Dark  Lord  and  know  his 
mind,  or  all  of  his  mind  that  concerns  the  Elves.
The  time 
dragged  on.
‘And  hold  to 
your  purpose!
Sam 
could  hear  his  own  joints  creaking,  if  he  stirred.
There’s  some  not  far  away  that  wouldn’t  offer  a 
pint  of  beer  to  a  friend,  if  they  lived  in  a  hole  with  golden 
walls.
You  have  had  your  joke,  and  alarmed  or  offended  most  of 
your  relations,  and  given  the  whole  Shire  something  to  talk 
about  for  nine  days,  or  ninety-nine  more  likely.
Memory  is  not 
what  the  heart  desires.
The  sun,  too,  was  warm  and  comforting,  and  the  mist  before 
his  eyes  seemed  to  be  lifting  a  little.
The 
flet  was  not  at  all  to  their  liking  as  a  bedroom.
So  I  thought,  perhaps,  you 
would  care  to  have  this,  don’t  you  know?’ 

He  took  from  the  box  a  small  sword  in  an  old  shabby 
leathern  scabbard.
With  a  cry  Aragorn  roused  them.
‘No,’  he  said  slowly.
There  was  a  wide  wooden  gate  opening  out  of 
the  wall  into  the  lane.
It  seemed  to  be  wary,  and 
to  have  some  skill  in  trees,  or  I  might  have  thought  that  it 
was  one  of  you  hobbits.
But  many  another  name  he  has 
since  been  given  by  other  folk:  Forn  by  the  Dwarves,  Orald 
by  Northern  Men,  and  other  names  beside.
Gandalf  came  flying  down  the  steps  and  fell  to 
the  ground  in  the  midst  of  the  Company.
6o 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Sam  sat  silent  and  said  no  more.
‘What  do  you  say  now, 
Aragorn?’ 

‘That  I  feared  it  too,’  Aragorn  answered,  ‘but  less  than 
other  things.
Will  you  see  that  our  ponies 
are  ready  by  eight  o’clock?’ 

‘Very  good!
All  at  last  was  made  ready.
You  will  come  to  the  rapids  of  Sarn  Gebir, 
and  maybe  at  last  to  the  great  falls  of  Rauros  where  the  River 
thunders  down  from  Nen  Hithoel;  and  there  are  other  perils.
O!
Few  now  have  the 
skill  in  healing  to  match  such  evil  weapons.
You 
have  put  your  foot  in  it!
Old  Master  Gorbadoc  never 
had  fewer  than  a  couple  of  hundred  relations  in  the  place.
The  Dimrill  Dale 
is  full  of  vapour  and  clouds  of  smoke,  and  the  mountains  are 
troubled.
There  he  had  undoubtedly  fallen  into  a  pool  or  a  river  and 
come  to  a  tragic,  but  hardly  an  untimely,  end.
The  sea  rose  and  raged  in  a 
great  storm.
At  first  the  beauty  of  the  melodies  and  of  the  interwoven 
words  in  elven-tongues,  even  though  he  understood  them 
little,  held  him  in  a  spell,  as  soon  as  he  began  to  attend  to 
them.
‘Isn’t  there  some  trick?
At  all  costs  we  must  keep  you  away 
from  the  Golden  Perch.
But  after  a  time,  as  Frodo 
did  not  show  any  sign  of  writing  a  book  on  the  spot,  the 
hobbits  returned  to  their  questions  about  doings  in  the 
Shire.
They  talked 
together  in  soft  voices,  oblivious  of  the  mirth  and  music  in 
the  hall  about  them.
Leaves  were 
whispering.
Hobbits  give  presents  to  other  people  on  their 
own  birthdays.
We  heard  news  of  you,  and  learned  that  you 
were  wandering.
‘For  you  little  gardener  and  lover  of  trees,’  she  said  to  Sam, 
‘I  have  only  a  small  gift.’  She  put  into  his  hand  a  little  box  of 
plain  grey  wood,  unadorned  save  for  a  single  silver  rune  upon 
the  lid.
Frodo 
knocked  on  the  door,  and  Fatty  Bolger  opened  it.
After  a  year  or  two  he  left  the 
mountains.
Only  to  be  picked  up  by  the  most  unlikely  person  imaginable: 
Bilbo  from  the  Shire!
THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


83 


‘But  I  don’t  think  you  need  go  alone.
Alas!
That  is  tidings  indeed.’ 

‘Alas!
‘There  was  too  much  of  that  Mr.
‘Let  us  shut 
out  the  night!’  she  said.
He  stood  up,  drawing  Sting  from 
its  sheath,  and  faced  the  eyes.
But  harder  than  stone  is  the  flesh  and  bone 
Of  a  troll  that  sits  in  the  hills  alone.
I  let  the  matter  be.
‘After  all 
that’s  what  this  party  business  was  all  about,  really:  to  give 
away  lots  of  birthday-presents,  and  somehow  make  it  easier 
to  give  it  away  at  the  same  time.
To  his  dis¬ 
may  the  edges  gleamed  dimly  in  the  night.
He  disappears  for  a  month,  or  a  year,  and  then  he 
pops  up  again.
But  I  know 
how  long  it  would  take  me  on  my  own  feet,  with  fair  weather 
and  no  ill  fortune:  twelve  days  from  here  to  the  Ford  of 
Bruinen,  where  the  Road  crosses  the  Loudwater  that  runs 
out  of  Rivendell.
Flard  was  my  parting  from  Lothlorien.
Still  Gandalf  did  not  appear.
And  hobbits  don’t  cheat.
All  trembled,  and  the  Elves  stopped 
their  ears.
‘Good  morning!’  said  Gandalf.
He  can’t 
fly  across  rivers,  and  he  can’t  jump  waterfalls.
The  watchful  eyes  both  of  Saruman  and 
of  the  Enemy  are  on  them.
We  are  sitting 
in  a  fortress.
Looking  ahead  they  could  see  only  tree-trunks 
of  innumerable  sizes  and  shapes:  straight  or  bent,  twisted, 
leaning,  squat  or  slender,  smooth  or  gnarled  and  branched; 
and  all  the  stems  were  green  or  grey  with  moss  and  slimy, 
shaggy  growths.
I  had  thought  of  putting:  and  he  lived  happily 
ever  afterwards  to  the  end  of  his  days.
Fie  lay  a  little  while  longer  looking 
at  patches  of  sunlight  on  the  wall,  and  listening  to  the  sound 
of  a  waterfall.
They  were  steering,  as  well  as  they  could  guess, 
for  the  gate -like  opening  at  the  far  northward  end  of  the  long 
valley  which  they  had  seen  in  the  morning.
At  last,  as  far  as  they  could 
judge,  they  had  reached  the  middle  of  the  stream  again  and 
had  driven  their  boats  back  some  distance  above  the  jutting 
rocks.
Strider  made  them 
take  cover  in  a  thicket  at  the  side  of  the  Road,  while  he  went 
forward  to  explore.
‘I  won’t 
give  you  away;  but  I  was  told  that  this  Baggins  would  be 
going  by  the  name  of  Underhill,  and  I  was  given  a  description 
that  fits  you  well  enough,  if  I  may  say  so.’ 

‘Indeed!
‘They  don’t  feel  at  all: 
which  is  an  improvement,  but’  -  he  made  an  effort  -  ‘I  can 
move  my  arm  again  a  little.
‘I  can’t  help 
feeling  curious,  you  know,  after  all  I’ve  heard.
‘I  don’t  want  to  be  neither!’ 

In  the  afternoon  they  went  on  down  the  woods.
I’ll  knock  holes  in  all  the 
boats  first.’ 

Frodo  actually  laughed.
‘These  were  no  ordinary 
wolves  hunting  for  food  in  the  wilderness.
His  sword  was  long,  his  lance  was  keen, 
his  shining  helm  afar  was  seen; 
the  countless  stars  of  heaven’s  field 
were  mirrored  in  his  silver  shield.
Perhaps  they  were  waiting  to  make  some  ambush  in  a 
narrow  place?
‘I  have  brought  you  here  so  that  you  may  look  in  it,  if  you 
will.’ 

The  air  was  very  still,  and  the  dell  was  dark,  and  the  Elf- 
lady  beside  him  was  tall  and  pale.
Ring  a  ding  dillo!
‘I  am  not  sure  that  I  like 
it:  it  has  a  -  well,  rather  a  barrow-wightish  look.
Outside  every¬ 
thing  was  green  and  pale  gold.
You  will  give  me  the  Ring  freely!
I 
should  like  to  get  into  those  pine -woods  up  there.’  He  pointed 
away  far  up  the  side  of  Rivendell  to  the  north.
There’s 
a  party  that  came  up  the  Greenway  from  down  South  last 
night  -  and  that  was  strange  enough  to  begin  with.
‘It  looks  like  a  tomb,’  muttered  Frodo,  and  bent  forwards 
with  a  curious  sense  of  foreboding,  to  look  more  closely  at  it.
We  have  come  to 
the  eaves  of  the  Golden  Wood.
But  I  begin  to  wish, 
somehow,  that  I  had  gone  too.
‘At  first  I  feared,  as  Saruman  no  doubt  intended,  that  Rada- 
gast  had  also  fallen.
Dark  will  come  early  this  evening.
If  they  fail,  what  then?’ 

‘We  shall  fall  in  battle  valiantly.
Elves,  sir!
‘I  cannot,’  said  Gimli.
‘I  can¬ 
not  sing  any  more,’  he  said.
The  only  plan  that  is  proposed  to 
us  is  that  a  halfling  should  walk  blindly  into  Mordor  and 
offer  the  Enemy  every  chance  of  recapturing  it  for  himself.
Merry  was  still  read¬ 
ing  and  pondering  Gandalf’s  letter  when  Strider  and  Nob 
returned.
The 
fogs  and  mists  were  gone.
A  spasm  of  anger  passed 
swiftly  over  the  hobbit’s  face  again.
But  glory  and  trum¬ 
pets!’  he  cried,  turning  round  again  with  shining  eyes  and 
dancing  on  the  floor.
If  we  make  no  answer, 
the  Enemy  may  move  Men  of  his  rule  to  assail  King  Brand, 
and  Dain  also.’ 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


315 


‘You  have  done  well  to  come,’  said  Elrond.
There  was  a  ring  of  metal.
He  said  something  about  going  for  a  breath  of  air.’ 

Well,  you  do  want  looking  after  and  no  mistake:  your  party 
might  be  on  a  holiday!’  said  Butterbur.
Frodo  is  his  first  and  second 
cousin,  once  removed  either  way,  as  the  saying  is,  if  you 
follow  me.
Let 
the  little  people  blow!
Gandalf  stayed  in  the  Shire  for  over  two  months.
Is  it  not  a  strange  fate  that  we  should  suffer  so  much  fear  and 
doubt  for  so  small  a  thing?
There  were  the  prints  of  orc-feet  in  the  earth.
‘For  the  rest,  they  shall  represent  the  other  Free  Peoples  of 
the  World:  Elves,  Dwarves,  and  Men.
I  was  sent  to  bear  tidings  not  burdens.” 

‘  “Then  I  must  have  a  steed  on  land,”  I  said,  “and  a  steed 
surpassingly  swift,  for  I  have  never  had  such  need  of  haste 
before.” 

‘  “Then  I  will  bear  you  to  Edoras,  where  the  Lord  of  Rohan 
sits  in  his  halls,”  he  said;  “for  that  is  not  very  far  off.”  And  I 
was  glad,  for  in  the  Riddermark  of  Rohan  the  Rohirrim,  the 
Horse-lords,  dwell,  and  there  are  no  horses  like  those  that  are 
bred  in  that  great  vale  between  the  Misty  Mountains  and  the 
White.
And  that’s  what  I  was  leading  up  to.
Evil  had 
been  seen  and  heard  there,  sorrow  had  been  known;  the  Elves 
feared  and  distrusted  the  world  outside:  wolves  were  howling 
on  the  wood’s  borders:  but  on  the  land  of  Lorien  no  shadow 
lay.
There  was  beer  in 
plenty,  and  a  mighty  dish  of  mushrooms  and  bacon,  besides 
much  other  solid  farmhouse  fare.
They  did  not  sing  or  even  speak  much 
for  a  while,  and  paid  close  attention  to  business.
I  guess  that  he  was 
attacked  on  this  hill-top,  but  with  what  result  I  cannot  tell.
For  a  long  time  they  debated  what  they  should  do,  and 
how  it  would  be  best  to  attempt  the  fulfilling  of  their  purpose 
with  the  Ring;  but  they  came  to  no  decision.
I  got  up  before  dawn  and  went  after  them.
Out  of  the  east  the  biting  wind  was  blowing.
For  he  is  very  wise,  and 
weighs  all  things  to  a  nicety  in  the  scales  of  his  malice.
Frodo  sat  and  shiv¬ 
ered  in  his  wraps.
‘I  have  known  much  that  only  the 
Wise  know,  Frodo.
Heed  no  nightly  noises!’  Then  he  went  to  sleep  again.
But  it  was  a  terribly  narrow  shave,  so  to 
speak.
For  none  have  ever  made  to  me  a  request  so  bold  and  yet  so 
courteous.
And  even  Bilbo’s  story  suggests  the  kinship.
Black  Riders!’ 

‘Black  Riders!’  cried  Frodo.
Shadows  had  fallen  in  the  valley  below, 
but  there  was  still  a  light  on  the  faces  of  the  mountains  far 
above.
He  gave  out  that  he  was 
interested  in  history  and  geography  (at  which  there  was  much 
wagging  of  heads,  although  neither  of  these  words  were 
much  used  in  the  Bree-dialect) .
I 
wanted  to  find  him  quickly.
Neither 
have  we  done  harm  to  the  Elves.
You  see,  I  was  asked 
to  look  out  for  hobbits  of  the  Shire,  and  for  one  by  the  name 
of  Baggins  in  particular.’ 


2l8 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘And  what  has  that  got  to  do  with  me?’  asked  Frodo.
If  he  does,  I  really  shall  turn  him  into  a  toad.’ 

‘As  for  where  I  am  going,’  said  Frodo,  ‘it  would  be  difficult 
to  give  that  away,  for  I  have  no  clear  idea  myself,  yet.’ 

‘Don’t  be  absurd!’  said  Gandalf.
‘You  mean  Otho  and 
Lobelia.
I  may 
be  away  for  a  good  while;  but  I’ll  come  and  see  you  again,  as 
soon  as  I  can.
“What  had  it  got 


76 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


in  its  pocketses?”  he  said.
But  I  did  not  know  that  they  had 
arisen  again  or  I  should  have  fled  with  you  at  once.
I  hope  you  are  all  enjoying  yourselves  as  much  as  I  am.
‘I  knew  nothing  of  this  letter.
Ever  as  I  came  north  I 
heard  tidings  of  the  Riders,  and  though  I  gained  on  them  day 
by  day,  they  were  ever  before  me.
The  third  and  last 
time,  so  he  says,  is  soon  to  come,  before  the  ending  of  the 
year.
Pippin  suddenly  felt  that 
he  could  not  bear  it  any  longer,  and  without  warning  let  out 
a  shout.
The  Birthday,  and  the  removal,  drew 
nearer,  and  still  he  did  not  come,  or  send  word.
They  sat  beside  the  water  listening  to 
the  confused  rush  and  roar  of  the  Rapids  hidden  in  the  mist; 
they  were  tired  and  sleepy,  and  their  hearts  were  as  gloomy 
as  the  dying  day.
But 
neither  Nimrodel  nor  Amroth  came  ever  back.
What  hand  save  Sauron’s  ever 
held  this  thing,  ere  it  was  lost?
Sam  burst  into 
tears,  and  fumbled  with  the  straps,  unlading  all  the  pony’s 
packs  and  throwing  them  on  the  ground.
But  come!
It  commands  a  wide  view  all  round; 
and  there  we  shall  have  a  chance  to  look  about  us.
‘Now,  therefore,  things  shall  be  openly  spoken  that  have 
been  hidden  from  all  but  a  few  until  this  day.
Or  are  you 
perhaps  lost?’  Then  he  called  aloud  to  the  others,  and  all  the 
company  stopped  and  gathered  round.
At  first  Frodo  felt  as  if  he  had  indeed  been  turned  into 
stone  by  the  incantation.
No  sign  of  gate  or  entrance,  not  a  fissure 
or  crack  could  Frodo  see  in  the  frowning  stone.
There  was  a  ring  and 
clash  of  steel.
Bilbo  and  Frodo 
happened  to  have  the  same  birthday,  September  22nd.
in  our  need  chance  brings  to  light  the 
Ring  of  Power.
And  to  all  appearance  the  wizard  did  leave  Frodo  alone, 
and  he  did  settle  down,  but  the  growth  of  hobbit-sense  was 
not  very  noticeable.
‘I 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


385 


thought  from  the  beginning,  when  first  I  considered  this  jour¬ 
ney,  that  we  should  try  it.
The  sun  on  the  hill-top  was  now  getting  hot.
‘That  is  Durin’s  Stone!’  cried  Gimli.
With  what  strength  he  had  he  hewed  at  the 
crawling  arm  near  the  wrist,  and  the  hand  broke  off;  but  at 
the  same  moment  the  sword  splintered  up  to  the  hilt.
The  Ring  went  into  the 
shadows  with  him,  and  even  the  maker,  when  his  power  had 
begun  to  grow  again,  could  learn  nothing  of  it.’ 

‘Gollum!’  cried  Frodo.
There  is  little  shelter  or  defence  here,  but 
fire  shall  serve  for  both.
Too  often  the  Elves 
have  fled  that  way.
‘But  I  am  Aragorn,  and 
those  verses  go  with  that  name.’  He  drew  out  his  sword,  and 
they  saw  that  the  blade  was  indeed  broken  a  foot  below  the 
hilt.
He  found  breathing  painful.
I  am  not  Gandalf,  and  though  I  have  tried 
to  bear  his  part,  I  do  not  know  what  design  or  hope  he  had 
for  this  hour,  if  indeed  he  had  any.
It  was 
Radagast  the  Brown,  who  at  one  time  dwelt  at  Rhosgobel, 
near  the  borders  of  Mirkwood.
But 
the  only  measure  that  he  knows  is  desire,  desire  for  power; 
and  so  he  judges  all  hearts.
He  was 
mighty  book-learned  was  dear  old  Mr.
Follow  me!’  he  called  back  over  his  shoulder, 
and  he  hurried  forward.
The 
land  of  the  Beornings  was  aflame;  a  cloud  was  over  Moria; 
smoke  rose  on  the  borders  of  Lorien.
‘I  was  wrong  after  all,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘and  Gimli  too.
‘The  Ferry  is  east  from  Woodhall;  but  the  hard  road 
curves  away  to  the  left  -  you  can  see  a  bend  of  it  away  north 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS  115 

over  there.
The  countless  years  had  filled 
them  with  pride  and  rooted  wisdom,  and  with  malice.
At  that  moment  there  was  a  sharp  twang.
‘He  deserves  roasting.
The 
power  of  the  ring  had  lengthened  his  years  far  beyond  their 
span;  but  that  power  only  the  Great  Rings  wield.
And  we 
will,  precious!” 

‘That  is  a  sample  of  his  talk.
Boromir 
hurled  himself  against  the  door  and  slammed  it  again.
The  woods  on  either  side  became  denser;  the  trees  were 
now  younger  and  thicker;  and  as  the  lane  went  lower,  running 
down  into  a  fold  of  the  hills,  there  were  many  deep  brakes  of 
hazel  on  the  rising  slopes  at  either  hand.
Then  he  saw  that  they  were 
indeed  shaped  and  fashioned:  the  craft  and  power  of  old  had 
wrought  upon  them,  and  still  they  preserved  through  the  suns 
and  rains  of  forgotten  years  the  mighty  likenesses  in  which 
they  had  been  hewn.
‘I  suppose  you  three  won’t  want  mushrooms  again?’  said 
Fredegar  without  much  hope.
His  heart  went  suddenly  cold.
Just  over  the  top  of  the  hill  they  came  on  the  patch  of 
fir-wood.
There  was  no  horse.’ 

Which  way  did  it  go?’  asked  Strider,  suddenly  and  sharply.
A  nasty  name.
Will  you  not  take  mine?’ 

‘I  think  I  know  already  what  counsel  you  would  give, 
Boromir,’  said  Frodo.
She  is  too 
low  in  the  water  with  all  this  baggage,  and  the  Great  River  is 
swift.
Baggins  has  gone  away.
Indeed,  Frodo,  I  fear  that  he 
may  even  think  that  the  long-unnoticed  name  of  Baggins  has 
become  important.’ 

‘But  this  is  terrible!’  cried  Frodo.
When  he  came  out 
he  was  bearing  in  his  arms  a  great  load  of  treasure:  things  of 
gold,  silver,  copper,  and  bronze;  many  beads  and  chains  and 
jewelled  ornaments.
‘We  can’t  leave  Frodo!
We,  of  course,  were  only 
sent  to  help  the  Bearer  along  the  road,  to  go  no  further  than 
we  wished;  and  none  of  us  is  under  any  oath  or  command  to 
seek  Mount  Doom.
An  overwhelm¬ 
ing  longing  to  rest  and  remain  at  peace  by  Bilbo’s  side  in 
Rivendell  filled  all  his  heart.
‘He  is  the  Master  of 
wood,  water,  and  hill.’ 

‘Then  all  this  strange  land  belongs  to  him?’ 

‘No  indeed!’  she  answered,  and  her  smile  faded.
You  say  the  ring  is  danger¬ 
ous,  far  more  dangerous  than  I  guess.
Sam  Gamgee  looked  back.
‘Late  one  evening  I  came  to  the  gate,  like  a  great  arch  in 
the  wall  of  rock;  and  it  was  strongly  guarded.
Chapter  9 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


Frodo  was  roused  by  Sam.
At  length  the  Lady  Galadriel  released  them  from  her  eyes, 
and  she  smiled.
But  there  are  few  left  in  Middle-earth  like  Aragorn  son  of 
Arathorn.
Every  now  and  again  they  heard  a  dull  rumble,  as  a  great 
boulder  rolled  down  from  hidden  heights  above.
Come,  Tom  Bombadil,  for  our  need  is  near  us!
We  should  be  very  hard  put  to  it,  even  if  it  were  not  for 
this  dreadful  chance.
His 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


153 


head  swam.
What 
do  you  think  of  that?’ 

Frodo  sat  for  a  moment  looking  at  the  fire,  but  his  only 
thought  was  how  on  earth  would  they  reach  the  Ferry.
A  fair  jaw-cracker 
dwarf-language  must  be!’  Maps  conveyed  nothing  to  Sam’s 
mind,  and  all  distances  in  these  strange  lands  seemed  so  vast 
that  he  was  quite  out  of  his  reckoning.
There  are  noises  in  the  deeps  of  the  earth.
But  they  had  not  gone  very  far  before  Pippin  came  running 
back,  followed  by  Merry.
All  the  Council  sat  with  downcast  eyes,  as  if  in  deep 
thought.
‘You  are  forgetting  not  only  your  family  history,  but  all 
you  ever  knew  about  trolls,’  said  Strider.
But  I  don’t  feel  too  sure 
about  this  whole  affair.
Ride  on!’  cried  Glorfmdel,  and  then  loud  and 
clear  he  called  to  the  horse  in  the  elf-tongue:  now  lim,  now 
lim,  Asfaloth!
What  fun!
He  bade  me  take  a  horse  and  be  gone;  and  I  chose 
one  much  to  my  liking,  but  little  to  his.
The  Mines  of  Moria 
were  vast  and  intricate  beyond  the  imagination  of  Gimli, 
Gloin’s  son,  dwarf  of  the  mountain-race  though  he  was.
‘Revenge  for  what?
Frodo  looked  back 
and  caught  a  gleam  of  white  foam  among  the  grey  tree-stems.
It 
was  some  time  before  he  looked  about  him  again  or  even 
turned  to  his  neighbours.
‘  “I  have  been  told  that  wherever  they  go  the  Riders  ask  for 
news  of  a  land  called  Shire.” 

‘  “  The  Shire,”  I  said;  but  my  heart  sank.
And  when  the  wind  is 
in  the  South  the  voice  of  Amroth  comes  up  from  the  sea;  for 
Nimrodel  flows  into  Silverlode,  that  Elves  call  Celebrant,  and 
Celebrant  into  Anduin  the  Great,  and  Anduin  flows  into  the 
Bay  of  Belfalas  whence  the  Elves  of  Lorien  set  sail.
But  take  care  at  first!’ 

‘Heed  the  words!’  said  the  other  Elves.
They  seemed  to  be  moving  this  way.’ 

‘Keep  close  to  the  fire,  with  your  faces  outward!’  cried 
Strider.
‘I  will 
sing  you  a  song  of  the  maiden  Nimrodel,  who  bore  the  same 
name  as  the  stream  beside  which  she  lived  long  ago.
A  quick  duck  had  saved  him;  and  he  had  felled  his  ore:  a 
sturdy  thrust  with  his  Barrow-blade.
‘But  fear  grew  in  me  as  I  rode.
I  hoped  you  would  manage  it.
There  was  some 
laughing  and  clapping:  the  audience  seemed  to  think  that 
Ted  had  scored  a  point.
Immediately,  though  everything  else  remained  as  before, 
dim  and  dark,  the  shapes  became  terribly  clear.
If  you  have  to  go,  then  it  will 
be  a  punishment  for  any  of  us  to  be  left  behind,  even  in 
Rivendell.
Rada¬ 
gast  the  Simple!
I 
had  quite  forgotten  it.
‘This  is  Glorfindel, 
who  dwells  in  the  house  of  Elrond,’  said  Strider.
It 
whirled  about  them  thicker  than  ever,  and  the  wind  blew 
louder.
And  suddenly  he  produces  an  heir,  and  has  all  the  papers 
made  out  proper.
But  the  keepers 
of  the  gate  were  on  the  watch  for  me  and  told  me  that 
Saruman  awaited  me.
The 
Eagles  report  that  Ores  are  gathering  again  from  afar;  but 
there  is  a  hope  that  Moria  is  still  free.
Hey!
Good  night!
I  shall 
not  keep  you  long,  he  cried.
AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY  199 

The  hobbits  rode  on  up  a  gentle  slope,  passing  a  few 
detached  houses,  and  drew  up  outside  the  inn.
A 
mighty  eagle  swept  down  and  bore  him  away.
He  decided  to  wait  until  nightfall.
That  is 
the  path  of  despair.
‘Yonder  is  the  Dimrill  Stair,’  said  Aragorn,  pointing  to  the 
falls.
Even  in  the  Shire  the  rumour  of 
the  Barrow-wights  of  the  Barrow-downs  beyond  the  Forest 
had  been  heard.
I  don’t  know  how  to  say  it,  but  after  last  night 
I  feel  different.
I  can’t  bear  to  think 
of  bringing  the  news  to  him.’ 

One  evening  Frodo  and  Sam  were  walking  together  in 
the  cool  twilight.
We  live  now  upon  an  island 
amid  many  perils,  and  our  hands  are  more  often  upon  the 
bowstring  than  upon  the  harp.
The  hobbits  ran 
about  for  a  while  on  the  grass,  as  he  told  them.
Obstinate  silence.
When  he  was 
found  he  had  already  been  there  long,  and  was  on  his  way 
back.
But  in  the  centre  a  cairn  of  broken  stones  had  been 
piled.
Which  way  would  any  of  us  choose 
in  Frodo’s  place?
The  mist  was  flowing  past  him  now  in  shreds 
and  tatters.
‘I  should  not  shout,  if  I  were  you,’  said  Merry.
‘How  bright  your  garden  looks!’  said  Gandalf.
Twelve  more  years  passed.
Cheers  again.
How  loathsome!’ 

‘I  think  it  is  a  sad  story,’  said  the  wizard,  ‘and  it  might  have 
happened  to  others,  even  to  some  hobbits  that  I  have  known.’ 

‘I  can’t  believe  that  Gollum  was  connected  with  hobbits, 
however  distantly,’  said  Frodo  with  some  heat.
He  wondered  why  the 
man  was  so  suspicious,  and  whether  anyone  had  been  asking 
for  news  of  a  party  of  hobbits.
Bill  the  pony  started  in  fear,  and 
Sam  sprang  to  his  side  and  whispered  softly  to  him.
Beyond 
that  they  came  again  to  a  belt  of  trees:  tall  oaks,  for  the  most 
part,  with  here  and  there  an  elm  tree  or  an  ash.
That  was  on  Wednesday 
the  eve  of  the  Party.
Then  all 
the  sky  was  clean  and  blue  and  birds  sang  in  every  tree.
But  if  Legolas  was  with  the  Com¬ 
pany,  he  would  not  interpret  the  songs  for  them,  saying  that 
he  had  not  the  skill,  and  that  for  him  the  grief  was  still  too 
near,  a  matter  for  tears  and  not  yet  for  song.
I  care  not,’  said  Boromir.
It  seemed  unfair  to  have  put  his  friends  to  all  this 
trouble;  and  he  wondered  again  how  he  was  going  to  break 
the  news  to  them  that  he  must  leave  them  so  soon,  indeed  at 
once.
Indeed  it  certainly  would;  for 
this  is  the  One,  and  he  is  exerting  all  his  power  to  find  it  or 
draw  it  to  himself.
He  was  seldom  moved  to  make  song  or  rhyme; 
even  in  Rivendell  he  had  listened  and  had  not  sung  himself, 
though  his  memory  was  stored  with  many  things  that  others 
had  made  before  him.
There  was  a  pause  longer 
than  usual,  and  Gandalf  and  Gimli  were  whispering  together; 
the  others  were  crowded  behind,  waiting  anxiously.
Soon  there  could  be  no  doubt:  three  or  four 
tall  black  figures  were  standing  there  on  the  slope,  looking 
down  on  them.
It  is  mad  not  to  use  it,  to  use  the  power  of  the  Enemy  against 
him.
They  were  near  its  eastern  end;  westward  it  ran  away 


428  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

into  darkness.
I, 
too,  despaired  at  last,  and  I  began  my  homeward  journey.
Only  a  remnant  of  our 
eastern  force  came  back,  destroying  the  last  bridge  that  still 
stood  amid  the  ruins  of  Osgiliath.
“This  lane 
don’t  lead  anywhere,  and  wherever  you  may  be  going,  your 
quickest  way  will  be  back  to  the  road.”  I  didn’t  like  the  looks 
of  him;  and  when  Grip  came  out,  he  took  one  sniff  and  let 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS  123 

out  a  yelp  as  if  he  had  been  stung:  he  put  down  his  tail  and 
bolted  off  howling.
When  they  came  to  make 
their  meal,  they  found  that  the  Elves  had  filled  their  bottles 
with  a  clear  drink,  pale  golden  in  colour:  it  had  the  scent  of 
a  honey  made  of  many  flowers,  and  was  wonderfully  refresh¬ 
ing.
‘Can’t  anything  be  done,  Mr.
But  her  brothers,  Elladan  and 
Elrohir,  were  out  upon  errantry;  for  they  rode  often  far  afield 
with  the  Rangers  of  the  North,  forgetting  never  their  mother’s 
torment  in  the  dens  of  the  ores.
They  are  deadly.
Now  these  folk  aren’t  wanderers  or  homeless,  and  seem  a  bit 
nearer  to  the  likes  of  us:  they  seem  to  belong  here,  more  even 
than  Etobbits  do  in  the  Shire.
It  is  long  and  sad,  for  it  tells  how  sorrow 
came  upon  Lothlorien,  Lorien  of  the  Blossom,  when  the 
Dwarves  awakened  evil  in  the  mountains.’ 

‘But  the  Dwarves  did  not  make  the  evil,’  said  Gimli.
Do  NO  T  use  It  again,  not  for  any  reason  whatever!
They  behaved  very  queer  all  the  time  they 
were  here:  wilful,  you  might  say.” 

‘  “Ass!
‘No,  I  am  afraid  not,’  said  Frodo.
The  travellers 
passed  within,  and  the  gates  shut  behind  them.
‘Twice.
As  they  ran  they 
heard  the  beat  and  echo  of  many  hurrying  feet  behind.
It  is  a 
pity  that  Gandalf  did  not  find  out  more  sooner.
They 
crossed  the  Nimrodel  -  curse  their  foul  feet  in  its  clean  water!
Then  a 
number  of  other  people  came  (without  orders):  Bagginses, 
and  Boffins,  and  Bolgers,  and  Tooks,  and  other  guests  that 
lived  or  were  staying  near.
As  soon  as  it  was  light,  Strider  took  Merry 
with  him  and  went  to  survey  the  country  from  the  height  to 
the  east  of  the  pass.
But  I  beg  you  two,  Legolas  and  Gimli,  at 
least  to  be  friends,  and  to  help  me.
Often  he  took  Gimli  with  him  when  he  went 
abroad  in  the  land,  and  the  others  wondered  at  this  change.
‘It  does 
more  harm  than  good.’ 

Frodo  began  to  wonder  if  it  were  possible  to  find  a  way 
through,  and  if  he  had  been  right  to  make  the  others  come 
into  this  abominable  wood.
Strider  built  up  the  fire  and  blew  out 
all  the  candles.
A  great  sleepiness  came  over  Frodo;  he  felt  himself  sinking 
fast  into  a  warm  and  hazy  dream.
It  was 
close-woven  of  many  rings,  as  supple  almost  as  linen,  cold  as 
ice,  and  harder  than  steel.
Tremendous  outburst  of  approval.
That  is  his  purpose.’ 

‘But  what  then  would  happen,  if  the  Ruling  Ring  were 
destroyed,  as  you  counsel?’  asked  Gloin.
I  have  seen  a  good  deal  of  you.
Eat  earth!
‘He  knows,  as  well  as  I  do,  that  you  mean  no  harm.
I  had  to  study  you  first,  and  make  sure 
of  you.
It  was  plain  that 
most  of  them  desired  to  go  first  to  Minas  Tirith,  and  to  escape 
at  least  for  a  while  from  the  terror  of  the  Enemy.
Old  Gandalf.
They  gleamed  as  he 
drew  them  from  their  black  sheaths,  wrought  of  some  strange 
metal,  light  and  strong,  and  set  with  many  fiery  stones.
It  was  a  fine  night,  and  the  black  sky  was  dotted  with  stars.
When  the  Elves  passed  west¬ 
ward,  Tom  was  here  already,  before  the  seas  were  bent.
He  sprang  forward  and  bore  down  on  Frodo.
He  had 
heavy  black  brows,  and  dark  scornful  eyes;  his  large  mouth 
curled  in  a  sneer.
That  was  Gandalf’s  mark,  of  course,  and  the  old  man 
was  Gandalf  the  Wizard,  whose  fame  in  the  Shire  was  due 
mainly  to  his  skill  with  fires,  smokes,  and  lights.
We  came  on  his  trail 
among  those  of  many  Ores,  and  it  plunged  deep  into  the 
Forest,  going  south.
A 
dark  lantern  was  uncovered,  and  its  light  fell  on  the  astonished 
face  of  the  farmer.
Yet  steadily 
the  mountains  were  drawing  nearer.
The  Ores  will  not,  maybe,  come 
out  till  after  dusk,  but  we  must  be  far  away  before  nightfall.
We 
make  good  armour  and  keen  swords,  but  we  cannot  again 
make  mail  or  blade  to  match  those  that  were  made  before  the 
dragon  came.
Fear 
nothing!
Frodo  was  just  in 
time  to  grasp  Sam  by  the  hair  as  he  came  up,  bubbling  and 
struggling.
Still  here  it  is - ’ 

At  that  moment  there  came  a  knock  at  the  door.
Many  times  he  repeated  these  words  in  different  order,  or 
varied  them.
FRODO  BAGGINS,  BAG  END,  HOBBITON 
in  the  SHIRE.
Close  to  the  Ford  there  is  a  small  hollow  beside  the 
road  masked  by  a  few  stunted  trees.
The 
briefer,  the  sooner  shall  you  be  refreshed.’ 

‘Very  well,’  said  Bilbo.
He  only  needs  the  One; 
for  he  made  that  Ring  himself,  it  is  his,  and  he  let  a  great  part 
of  his  own  former  power  pass  into  it,  so  that  he  could  rule  all 
the  others.
He  seemed  to  hear  or  remember  hearing: 
‘Nothing  passes  doors  or  windows  save  moonlight  and  star¬ 
light  and  the  wind  off  the  hill -top.’  A  little  breath  of  sweet  air 
moved  the  curtain.
What’s  that?’  cried  Gandalf.
‘And  how  do  you  know  that  we  go  the 
same  way  as  you,  for  you  do  not  know  whither  we  are  going?’ 

‘And  how  do  you  know  my  name?’  asked  Frodo  in  return.
To  the  south  the  Misty  Mountains  receded 
endlessly  as  far  as  sight  could  reach.
The  moon  as 
it  rose  seemed  to  hang  for  a  moment  above  his  head  and 
glistened  in  his  white  hair  as  the  wind  stirred  it.
Already  she  seemed  to  him,  as  by  men 
of  later  days  Elves  still  at  times  are  seen:  present  and  yet 
remote,  a  living  vision  of  that  which  has  already  been  left  far 
behind  by  the  flowing  streams  of  Time.
They  thought  they  were  going  to  get  Bag  End, 
that  time  when  he  went  off  and  was  thought  to  be  dead.
You  are  not  thinking  what  you  are  saying:  con¬ 
demned  to  go  on  this  hopeless  journey,  a  reward?
But  if  you  take  it  freely,  I 
will  say  that  your  choice  is  right;  and  though  all  the  mighty 
Elf-friends  of  old,  Hador,  and  Hurin,  and  Turin,  and  Beren 
himself  were  assembled  together,  your  seat  should  be  among 
them.’ 

‘But  you  won’t  send  him  off  alone  surely,  Master?’  cried 
Sam,  unable  to  contain  himself  any  longer,  and  jumping  up 
from  the  corner  where  he  had  been  quietly  sitting  on  the 
floor.
In  the  dark  without  moon  or  stars  a 
drawn  blade  gleamed,  as  if  a  chill  light  had  been  unsheathed.
As  Legolas  had  reported,  they  found  that  the  snow  became 
steadily  more  shallow  as  they  went  down,  so  that  even  the 
hobbits  could  trudge  along.
‘Fool  of  a  Took!’  he  growled.
Even  of  the  sky  above  you  must  beware 
as  you  go  on  your  way.’ 

The  Company  took  little  gear  of  war,  for  their  hope  was 
in  secrecy  not  in  battle.
And  I  am  always  wanting  to  put  it  on  and 
disappear,  don’t  you  know;  or  wondering  if  it  is  safe,  and 
pulling  it  out  to  make  sure.
But  I’m 
blest  if  I  know  which  way  you  have  come.
Here  and  there  through  open¬ 
ings  Frodo  could  catch  sudden  glimpses  of  rolling  meads, 
and  far  beyond  them  hills  in  the  sunset,  and  away  on  the 
edge  of  sight  a  dark  line,  where  marched  the  southernmost 
ranks  of  the  Misty  Mountains.
404 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘It  will  not  last  much  longer,  I  am  afraid,’  he  said;  ‘but  I 
think  we  need  it  after  that  horror  at  the  gate.
Come!
If  we  keep  on  as  we  are  going 
we  shall  get  up  into  the  Ettendales  far  north  of  Rivendell.
Tom’s  leg  is  game,  since  home  he  came, 

And  his  bootless  foot  is  lasting  lame; 

But  Troll  don’t  care,  and  he’s  still  there 
With  the  bone  he  boned  from  its  owner.
‘No,  Lady,’  he  answered.
As  the  Shadow  grows  once 
more,  they  too  may  walk  again.
Of  him  the  harpers  sadly  sing: 
the  last  whose  realm  was  fair  and  free 
between  the  Mountains  and  the  Sea.
That  is  the  path  I  am  going  to  try  and  find.’ 

The  hobbits  now  left  the  tunnel-gate  and  rode  across  the 
wide  hollow.
There  in  the  courts  of  the  King  grew  a 
white  tree,  from  the  seed  of  that  tree  which  Isildur  brought 
over  the  deep  waters,  and  the  seed  of  that  tree  before  came 
from  Eressea,  and  before  that  out  of  the  Uttermost  West  in 
the  Day  before  days  when  the  world  was  young.
As  the  light  grew  stronger  it  showed  a  silent  shrouded 
world.
Old  grey  Willow-man!
I  came  from  the  East.
It  was  very  unlike  Bilbo  to  do 
so,  anyway;  and  I  thought  it  rather  odd.’ 

‘So  did  I.
I  hoped  that  Frodo  had  set 
forth  at  once,  as  my  letter  had  urged,  and  that  he  had  reached 
Rivendell  before  the  deadly  pursuit  began.
‘Well,  my  little  fellows!’ 
said  he,  stooping  so  that  he  peered  into  their  faces.
In  this  box  there  is  earth 
from  my  orchard,  and  such  blessing  as  Galadriel  has  still  to 
bestow  is  upon  it.
That  was  touch  and  go:  perhaps  the 
most  dangerous  moment  of  all.
Merry  was  looking  from  side  to 
side,  and  seemed  already  uncertain  which  way  to  go.
There  were  some  that  shook  their  heads  and  thought 
this  was  too  much  of  a  good  thing;  it  seemed  unfair  that 
anyone  should  possess  (apparently)  perpetual  youth  as  well 
as  (reputedly)  inexhaustible  wealth.
But  even  as  the  ore 
flung  down  the  truncheon  and  swept  out  his  scimitar,  Anduril 
came  down  upon  his  helm.
The  sounds  died  slowly 
away,  and  seemed  to  go  southward,  on  into  the  wood.
‘I  was  up  long 
before;  and  we  are  only  waiting  for  you  to  finish  eating  and 
thinking.’ 

‘I  have  finished  both  now.
Frodo  wondered  whether  he  was  ill  (if  people  were  ever  ill  in 
Rivendell),  and  had  been  unable  to  come  to  the  feast.
‘They  are  fair  garments,  and  the  web  is 
good,  for  it  was  made  in  this  land.
How  many  there  were  the  Company  could  not  count.
He 
is  very  dangerous.
He  must  do  what  he  will.
A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


241 


At  the  day’s  end  they  came  to  a  stream  that  wandered 
down  from  the  hills  to  lose  itself  in  the  stagnant  marshland, 
and  they  went  up  along  its  hanks  while  the  light  lasted.
Frodo  sprang  to  his  feet.
‘Mr.
I  dare  not  take  it,  not  even  to  keep  it  safe,  unused.
In  the  morning  we  shall  have  gone;  but 
we  will  send  our  messages  through  the  lands.
Had  I  a  host  of  Elves  in 
armour  of  the  Elder  Days,  it  would  avail  little,  save  to  arouse 
the  power  of  Mordor.
And  all  those  close  talks  with  Gandalf.’ 

‘Good  heavens!’  said  Frodo.
Slowly  they  moved  off,  and 
were  soon  toiling  heavily.
This  many  a  year  has  Tim  been  gone, 

And  I  thought  he  were  lyin’  in  graveyard.’ 

‘My  lad,’  said  Troll,  ‘this  bone  I  stole.
The  hobbits  rose  rather 
later.
Is  the  table  laden?
Alas  that  I  spoke  true!
‘That  is  Loudwater,  the  Bruinen  of  Rivendell,’  answered 
Strider.
Frodo,  if  you  do  have  another  go,  I  hope  you’ll 
say  a  word  about  his  fireworks,’  said  Sam.
‘And  I  mean  what  I  say, 
what’s  more.’ 

‘There’s  some  mistake  somewhere,’  said  Butterbur,  shak¬ 
ing  his  head.
The  first  grey  light  of  day  was  in  the  room,  and  a  cold 
air  was  coming  through  the  open  window.
He  thought  of  himself  running  free  over  the  grass,  griev¬ 
ing  for  Merry,  and  Sam,  and  Pippin,  but  free  and  alive  him¬ 
self.
With  a  great  effort  Frodo 
sat  upright  and  brandished  his  sword.
At  last  Elrond  spoke  again.
When  the  night-shadows  fall,  then  the  door  will  open, 

Out  of  the  window-panes  light  will  twinkle  yellow.
I  am  sure  it  is  very  important.’ 

‘In  that  case  I  am  sure  Gildor  would  have  refused  to  explain 
it,’  said  Frodo  sharply.
‘I  am  with  you, 
Gandalf !’ 

‘Gondor!’  cried  Boromir  and  leaped  after  him.
Tom’s  going  on  ahead  candles  for  to  kindle.
Some  of  my  kindred,  journeying  in  your  land 
beyond  the  Baranduin,*  learned  that  things  were  amiss,  and 
sent  messages  as  swiftly  as  they  could.
Vulgar 
expression.’ 

It  is  also,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  refer  to  ancient  history,  the 
anniversary  of  my  arrival  by  barrel  at  Esgaroth  on  the  Long 
Lake;  though  the  fact  that  it  was  my  birthday  slipped  my  memory 
on  that  occasion.
I  cannot  think  that  you 
brought  me  so  far  only  to  weary  my  ears.” 

‘He  looked  at  me  sidelong,  and  paused  a  while  considering.
But  such  a  thing  has 
not  happened  before,  that  Gandalf  broke  tryst  and  did  not 
come  when  he  promised.
One  moment  stood  she,  and  a  spell 
His  voice  laid  on  her:  Beren  came, 

And  doom  fell  on  Tiniwiel 

That  in  his  arms  lay  glistening.
‘That  is  ill  news  indeed.
True 
words  doubtless;  yet  all  such  comfort  is  cold.
It  came  to  me.’ 

‘Yes,  yes,’  said  Gandalf.
He  had  now 
no  hat  and  his  thick  brown  hair  was  crowned  with  autumn 
leaves.
Anyone  would  think  that  time  did 
not  count  in  there!’ 

‘And  perhaps  that  was  the  way  of  it,’  said  Frodo.
‘Now,  don’t  mistake  me!’  he  cried,  as  Frodo  rose  from  his 
seat,  and  Sam  jumped  up  with  a  scowl.
Some  are  greater  than  I  am.
They  have  a  long  road  before 
them.
I  wakened  Goldberry  singing 
under  window;  but  naught  wakes  hobbit-folk  in  the  early 
morning.
Heed  no 
nightly  noises!
I  don’t  know  why.
‘But  they  do  not 
say  anything  of  importance  to  us.
Doom ,  doom  it  rolled  again, 
as  if  huge  hands  were  turning  the  very  caverns  of  Moria  into  a 
vast  drum.
At 
first  they  were  no  more  than  pale  gossamer-threads,  so  fine 
that  they  only  twinkled  fitfully  where  the  Moon  caught  them, 
but  steadily  they  grew  broader  and  clearer,  until  their  design 
could  be  guessed.
It  turned  out  later  that  only  one  horse  had  been  actually 
stolen.
Wake  now,  my 
merry  friends!
There  let  it  lie  until  the  End.”  ’ 

Gandalf  fell  silent,  gazing  eastward  from  the  porch  to  the 
far  peaks  of  the  Misty  Mountains,  at  whose  great  roots  the 
peril  of  the  world  had  so  long  lain  hidden.
Up  he  got  and  ran  on.
But  he 
said  he  was  looking  after  you,  so  I  let  things  be.
What  is  it  all  about?
But  all 
that  has  been  wrought  by  those  who  wield  the  Three  will  turn 
to  their  undoing,  and  their  minds  and  hearts  will  become 
revealed  to  Sauron,  if  he  regains  the  One.
‘But  we  call  it  lembas  or  waybread, 
and  it  is  more  strengthening  than  any  food  made  by  Men, 
and  it  is  more  pleasant  than  cram,  by  all  accounts.’ 

‘Indeed  it  is,’  said  Gimli.
‘You  have  left  the  Shire,  and  are  now 
outside,  and  on  the  edge  of  the  Old  Forest.’ 

‘Are  the  stories  about  it  true?’  asked  Pippin.
They  are 
willing  to  go  at  least  to  the  passes  of  the  Mountains,  and 
maybe  beyond.
But  quite  brief,  mind  you,  and 
then  you  must  sleep  again.
Light  is  his  footfall!
‘Here  is  our  noble 
cousin!
And 
they  sent  a  messenger  to  bring  these  tidings  to  me.
Would  not  that  have  been  a  noble 
deed  to  set  to  the  credit  of  his  Ring,  if  I  had  taken  it  by  force 
or  fear  from  my  guest?
Little 
cheat.
There  were  rockets  like  a  flight  of  scintillating  birds  singing 
with  sweet  voices.
He  was  suddenly 
aware  that  it  was  getting  very  cold,  and  that  up  here  a  wind 
was  beginning  to  blow,  an  icy  wind.
I  don’t  suppose  you  want  any 
more.
For 
it  was  long  since  he  had  worn  it  much:  in  the  black  darkness 
it  was  seldom  needed.
Only  Sam  was  doubt¬ 
ful:  he  at  any  rate  still  thought  boats  as  bad  as  wild  horses, 
or  worse,  and  not  all  the  dangers  that  he  had  survived  made 
him  think  better  of  them.
He  could  not 
remember  having  seen  any  sign  of  these  in  the  valley,  when 
he  looked  out  from  the  hill  in  the  morning.
Soon  it  disappeared  in  the  folds 
of  the  darkened  land,  and  was  followed  by  Bywater  beside  its 
grey  pool.
I  think  Legolas’s 
bit  of  news  about  Gollum  caught  even  him  on  the  hop, 
though  he  passed  it  off.’ 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


355 


‘You  were  wrong,’  said  Gandalf.
At  that  moment,  among  the  trees  nearby,  a  horn  rang  out.
‘Draw 
your  blades,  and  stand  back  to  back!’ 

In  the  leaping  light,  as  the  fresh  wood  blazed  up,  Frodo 
saw  many  grey  shapes  spring  over  the  ring  of  stones.
They  at  once  gave  up  any  idea  of  going  back.
But  one  beyond  your  strength,  Bilbo.
I’m  in  a  hurry,  said  he,  and  I’ve  no  time  myself, 
but  I  want  a  message  took  to  the  Shire.
It  ran  all  the  way  from 
Brandywine  Bridge,  in  a  big  loop  curving  away  from  the 
river,  to  Haysend  (where  the  Withywindle  flowed  out  of  the 
Forest  into  the  Brandywine) :  well  over  twenty  miles  from  end 
to  end.
Brandybuck,’  said  Frodo;  ‘and  this  is 
Sam  Gamgee.
That  was  a  regrettable  misunderstanding,  long 
set  right.
Then  he 
lifted  his  head  and  peered  cautiously  above  one  of  the  great 
roots.
Certainly  the  dis¬ 
tances  had  now  all  become  hazy  and  deceptive,  but  there 
could  be  no  doubt  that  the  Downs  were  coming  to  an  end.
Their  land  was  originally  unprotected  from  the  East;  but 
on  that  side  they  had  built  a  hedge:  the  High  Hay.
‘But  I  do  not  know  yet  exactly 
where  we  are.
It  came  to  the  edge  of  the  fire  and  the  light  faded  as  if  a 
cloud  had  bent  over  it.
They  all  ducked, 
and  many  fell  flat  on  their  faces.
They  mounted,  and  soon  they  were  riding  off 
into  the  mist,  which  seemed  to  open  reluctantly  before  them 
and  close  forbiddingly  behind  them.
If  I  were  to  tell  you  all  that  tale,  we  should 
still  be  sitting  here  when  Spring  had  passed  into  Winter.
Elrond  is  sending  Elves, 
and  they  will  get  in  touch  with  the  Rangers,  and  maybe  with 
Thranduil’s  folk  in  Mirkwood.
Against  -  well,  if  it 
must  be  said,  against  trust  in  the  strength  and  truth  of  Men.’ 

‘Yet  that  strength  has  long  protected  you  far  away  in  your 
little  country,  though  you  knew  it  not.’ 

‘I  do  not  doubt  the  valour  of  your  people.
‘Don’t  be  too  troubled.
The  last  arrow  of  Legolas  kindled  in  the  air 
as  it  flew,  and  plunged  burning  into  the  heart  of  a  great 
wolf-chieftain.
As  the  light  grew  it  filtered 
through  the  yellow  leaves  of  the  mallorn,  and  it  seemed  to 
the  hobbits  that  the  early  sun  of  a  cool  summer’s  morning  was 
shining.
The  hall  of  Elrond’s  house  was  filled  with  folk:  Elves  for 
the  most  part,  though  there  were  a  few  guests  of  other  sorts.
Then  the 
ground  began  to  fall  rapidly,  and  the  brook  growing  strong 
and  noisy,  flowed  and  leaped  swiftly  downhill.
A  strange  creature 
also  had  been  seen,  running  with  bent  back  and  with  hands 
near  the  ground,  like  a  beast  and  yet  not  of  beast-shape.
But  I  did  not  expect  to 
use  this,  and  I  don’t  need  it  now,  except  to  look  at  sometimes.
Many  whined  overhead  or  struck  the 


504  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

water  nearby;  but  there  were  no  more  hits.
And  what’s  more,  out  of  the  Shire 
by  their  talk,’  said  the  gatekeeper,  softly  as  if  speaking  to 
himself.
All 
that  had  happened  since  Bilbo  left  the  Shire  was  passing 
through  his  mind,  and  he  recalled  and  pondered  everything 
that  he  could  remember  of  Gandalf ’s  words.
There  are  also  towels,  mats  and  soap.
They 
looked  about  in  amazement,  first  at  Frodo,  and  then  at  Tom 
standing  large  as  life  on  the  barrow-top  above  them;  and  then 
at  themselves  in  their  thin  white  rags,  crowned  and  belted 
with  pale  gold,  and  jingling  with  trinkets.
It  was  so  strong  that  it 
overcame  his  fear:  he  could  almost  have  run  out  there  and 
then  down  the  road  without  his  hat,  as  Bilbo  had  done  on  a 
similar  morning  long  ago.
That  is  in  truth  why  I  brought  you  here.
It  was  like  this:  when  I 
got  back  to  our  hole  yesterday  evening  with  the  key,  my  dad, 
he  says  to  me:  Hallo,  Sam!
And  I  do  not  doubt  that 
he  was  allowed  to  leave  Mordor  on  some  evil  errand.’ 

‘Alas!
‘It  is  part  of  the  lay 
that  is  called  The  Fall  of  Gil-galad,  which  is  in  an  ancient 
tongue.
Merry  and  Mr.
‘You  are  always  badgering  me  about  my  ring;  but  you 
have  never  bothered  me  about  the  other  things  that  I  got  on 
my  journey.’ 

‘No,  but  I  had  to  badger  you,’  said  Gandalf.
‘Put  it 
away!
You  will  never  get  to  Rivendell  now  on  your  own, 
and  to  trust  me  is  your  only  chance.
The  pain  and 
alarm  vanished  at  once,  and  the  prostrate  hobbits  leaped  to 
their  feet.
Who  will  read 
this  riddle  for  us?’ 

‘None  here  can  do  so,’  said  Elrond  gravely.
If  you  can  think 
of  any  way  of  slipping  out  of  the  Shire  without  its  being 
generally  known,  it  will  be  worth  a  little  delay.
Seven  the 
Dwarf-kings  possessed,  but  three  he  has  recovered,  and  the 
others  the  dragons  have  consumed.
Tree  and  flower  and  leaf  and  grass, 

Let  them  pass!
It  seems  to  me  only  too  likely  that  they  will  hear  of  it 
before  this  night  is  over.
The  air  was  thick  with 
them,  fluttering  yellow  from  the  branches;  for  there  was  a 
warm  and  gentle  breeze  blowing  softly  in  the  valley,  and  the 
reeds  were  rustling,  and  the  willow-boughs  were  creaking.
I  meant  no  harm,  on  my  honour, 
sir!’ 

‘He  won’t  hurt  you,’  said  Frodo,  hardly  able  to  keep  from 
laughing,  although  he  was  himself  startled  and  rather  puzzled.
‘Well,  that  isn’t  anything  new,  if  you  believe  the  old  tales.
Only  the  waning  might 
of  Gondor  stands  now  between  him  and  a  march  in  power 
along  the  coasts  into  the  North;  and  if  he  comes,  assailing 
the  White  Towers  and  the  Havens,  hereafter  the  Elves  may 
have  no  escape  from  the  lengthening  shadows  of  Middle- 
earth.’ 

‘Long  yet  will  that  march  be  delayed,’  said  Boromir.
For  many  sunless 
days  an  icy  blast  came  from  the  Mountains  in  the  east,  and 
no  garment  seemed  able  to  keep  out  its  searching  fingers.
A  tremor  ran  through  the  whole  willow.
Actually  in  Hobbiton  and  Bywater  every  day  in  the  year  was 
somebody’s  birthday,  so  that  every  hobbit  in  those  parts  had 
a  fair  chance  of  at  least  one  present  at  least  once  a  week.
Frodo  did 
not  see  him  again  for  a  long  time.
A  king  he  was  on  carven  throne 
In  many-pillared  halls  of  stone 
With  golden  roof  and  silver  floor, 

And  runes  of  power  upon  the  door.
‘You  are  abroad  late.
There  was  a  bit  of  bright  fire  burning  on  the  hearth, 
and  in  front  of  it  were  some  low  and  comfortable  chairs.
Your  friends 
crossed  after  the  flood  had  passed  and  they  found  you  lying 
on  your  face  at  the  top  of  the  bank,  with  a  broken  sword 
under  you.
Butterbur,’  said  a  hobbit;  ‘or  leastways  I 
didn’t  see  him,  if  you  take  my  meaning.
We  are  your  friends,  Frodo.
There  was  a  wide  arch  leading  to  a 
courtyard  between  the  two  wings,  and  on  the  left  under  the 
arch  there  was  a  large  doorway  reached  by  a  few  broad  steps.
Strider,  Sam,  and  Merry  pushing  with  all  their 
strength  managed  to  open  the  door  a  little  wider,  and  then 
Strider  and  Merry  went  in.
To 
that  fair  land  Frodo  never  came  again.
Frodo 
felt  every  step  more  painful  and  he  gasped  for  breath.
Frodo  looked  and  saw,  still  at  some  distance,  a  hill  of  many 
mighty  trees,  or  a  city  of  green  towers:  which  it  was  he  could 
not  tell.
‘The  Road  runs  along  the  edge  of  the  hills  for  many 
miles  from  the  Bridge  to  the  Ford  of  Bruinen.
‘Hallo  there!’  called  Farmer  Maggot.
In  any  case,  they  now  had  so 
great  a  dislike  for  that  hollow  place  about  the  stone  that  no 
thought  of  remaining  there  was  in  their  minds.
They  came  at  length  to  the  great  drift.
Then  they  turned  away  from  the  paved  road 
and  took  a  path  that  went  off  into  a  deep  thicket  of  mallorn- 
trees,  and  passed  on,  winding  through  rolling  woodlands  of 
silver  shadow,  leading  them  ever  down,  southwards  and  east¬ 
wards,  towards  the  shores  of  the  River.
Where  is  he?’  cried  Pippin.
I  sit  beside  the  fire  and  think 
of  all  that  I  have  seen, 
of  meadow-flowers  and  butterflies 
in  summers  that  have  been; 

Of  yellow  leaves  and  gossamer 
in  autumns  that  there  were, 
with  morning  mist  and  silver  sun 
and  wind  upon  my  hair.
‘Well,  well!
‘Here  is  the  heart  of  Elvendom  on  earth,’  he  said,  ‘and  here 
my  heart  dwells  ever,  unless  there  be  a  light  beyond  the  dark 
roads  that  we  still  must  tread,  you  and  I.
Neither  age  nor 
an  enormous  dinner  had  clouded  his  wits,  and  he  said  to  his 
daughter-in-law,  Esmeralda:  ‘There’s  something  fishy  in  this, 
my  dear!
‘But  in  metal-work  we 
cannot  rival  our  fathers,  many  of  whose  secrets  are  lost.
The  song  ended 
and  there  was  a  burst  of  laughter  and  clapping.
He  soon  will.
‘Hobbits  are,  or  were,  no 
concern  of  his.
They  took  no  notice  of  Pippin;  but  Sam  shrank 
against  the  wall,  while  two  wolvish-looking  dogs  sniffed  at 
him  suspiciously,  and  snarled  if  he  moved.
The 
memory  of  words  at  the  Council  came  back  to  me:  words  of 


328 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Saruman,  half-heeded  at  the  time.
‘It’s  been  a  queer  day,  and  no 
mistake.
If  you  really  wish  to 
hear  of  us,  I  will  tell  you  tidings  gladly.
The 
travellers  reached  a  low  ridge  crowned  with  ancient  holly- 
trees  whose  grey-green  trunks  seemed  to  have  been  built  out 
of  the  very  stone  of  the  hills.
Frodo  sat  up.
The  world  is  changing,  you  say.
‘  Yrch /’  said  Legolas,  falling  into  his  own  tongue.
We  will  all  be  blindfold,  even  Legolas.
‘He  is  debating  which  course  is  the  most  desperate,  I  think,’ 
said  Aragorn.
‘Hold  it  up!’  said  Gandalf.
They  decided 
to  make  for  the  top  at  once,  while  the  daylight  was  broad.
Even  so  it 
will  take  us  more  than  two  marches  before  we  reach  the  top 
of  the  pass.
Twilight  was  about  them  as  they  crept  back  to  the  lane.
On  two  chairs  beneath  the  bole  of  the  tree  and  canopied 
by  a  living  bough  there  sat,  side  by  side,  Celeborn  and 
Galadriel.
‘But  doom  and  great  deeds  are  indeed  at  hand.
Very  bright  was  that 
sword  when  it  was  made  whole  again;  the  light  of  the  sun 
shone  redly  in  it,  and  the  light  of  the  moon  shone  cold,  and 
its  edge  was  hard  and  keen.
‘And  in  the  watches  I  have  made  up  my  mind,’ 
he  said.
when  he  washed  the  mud  away,  there  in  his  hand  lay  a  beauti¬ 
ful  golden  ring;  and  it  shone  and  glittered  in  the  sun,  so  that 
his  heart  was  glad.
Frodo  only  a  child  and  all.’ 

‘I’ve  heard  they  went  on  the  water  after  dinner  in  the 
moonlight,’  said  Old  Noakes;  ‘and  it  was  Drogo’s  weight  as 
sunk  the  boat.’ 

‘And  /  heard  she  pushed  him  in,  and  he  pulled  her  in  after 
him,’  said  Sandyman,  the  Hobbiton  miller.
Most  incon¬ 
veniently  it  cut  across  the  line  they  had  chosen.
What  are  these  black  men  after,  and  where  do 
they  come  from,  I’d  like  to  know?’ 

‘I’m  sorry  I  can’t  explain  it  all,’  answered  Frodo.
The  Woodmen  said  that  there  was  some 
new  terror  abroad,  a  ghost  that  drank  blood.
‘Why,  it  is  better  than  the  honey- 
cakes  of  the  Beornings,  and  that  is  great  praise,  for  the 
Beornings  are  the  best  bakers  that  I  know  of;  but  they  are 
none  too  willing  to  deal  out  their  cakes  to  travellers  in  these 
days.
There 
now,  get  hold  of  the  side,  and  let  me  use  the  paddle!’ 

With  a  few  strokes  Frodo  brought  the  boat  back  to  the 
bank,  and  Sam  was  able  to  scramble  out,  wet  as  a  water-rat.
They  were  clad 
wholly  in  white;  and  the  hair  of  the  Lady  was  of  deep  gold, 
and  the  hair  of  the  Lord  Celeborn  was  of  silver  long  and 
bright;  but  no  sign  of  age  was  upon  them,  unless  it  were  in 
the  depths  of  their  eyes;  for  these  were  keen  as  lances  in  the 
starlight,  and  yet  profound,  the  wells  of  deep  memory.
It  was  singing  in  the  fair  elven- tongue,  of  which 
Frodo  knew  only  a  little,  and  the  others  knew  nothing.
There  are  many  evil  and 
unfriendly  things  in  the  world  that  have  little  love  for  those 
that  go  on  two  legs,  and  yet  are  not  in  league  with  Sauron, 
but  have  purposes  of  their  own.
Who  will  lead  us  now  in  this  deadly  dark?’ 

‘I  will,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘and  Gimli  shall  walk  with  me.
The  weather  was  still  grey  and  overcast,  with  wind  from  the 
East,  but  as  evening  drew  into  night  the  sky  away  westward 
cleared,  and  pools  of  faint  light,  yellow  and  pale  green, 
opened  under  the  grey  shores  of  cloud.
For  a  moment  he  wondered  if  the  Ring 
itself  had  not  played  him  a  trick;  perhaps  it  had  tried  to  reveal 
itself  in  response  to  some  wish  or  command  that  was  felt  in 
the  room.
‘It  seemed  to  me  to  fit  somehow, 
though  I  can’t  explain.
They  are  very  large!’ 

‘We  will  come  and  look  at  them,’  said  Strider,  picking  up 
a  stick.
Away  shall  fade!
There  was  no  sign  of  living  moving  things,  save  birds.
‘Poor  old  Bill!’  he  said  in  a  choking  voice.
Haldir  skilfully  cast 
over  the  stream  a  coil  of  grey  rope,  and  he  caught  it  and 
bound  the  end  about  a  tree  near  the  hank.
Pippin  marvelled  at  his  strength,  seeing  the  passage 
that  he  had  already  forced  with  no  other  tool  than  his  great 
limbs.
‘Steady!
They  were  on  their  backs,  and  their  faces  looked 
deathly  pale;  and  they  were  clad  in  white.
‘I  don’t,’  said  Gandalf  grimly.
Though  dead  he  be,  it  belongs  to  he; 

So  hand  the  old  bone  over!’ 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


271 


For  a  couple  o’  pins,’  says  Troll,  and  grins, 

‘I’ll  eat  thee  too,  and  gnaw  thy  shins.
I  never  thought 
I  should  be  going  that  way  myself!’ 

‘Going  to  Mordor!’  cried  Pippin.
There  was  victory  and 
defeat;  and  towers  fell,  fortresses  were  burned,  and  flames 
went  up  into  the  sky.
His  reply  to  all  inquiries 
was  simply  this:  ‘Air.
‘Slam  the  doors  and  wedge  them!’  shouted  Aragorn.
The  rider’s  cloak  streamed 
behind  him,  and  his  hood  was  thrown  back;  his  golden  hair 
flowed  shimmering  in  the  wind  of  his  speed.
It  seemed  that  they  had  vanished 
from  the  North.
‘And  are  the  others 
all  right?’ 


286 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Yes,  they  are  all  safe  and  sound,’  answered  Gandalf.
But  Lobelia  can  perhaps  be  for¬ 
given:  she  had  been  obliged  to  wait  about  seventy-seven  years 
longer  for  Bag  End  than  she  once  hoped,  and  she  was  now  a 
hundred  years  old.
Even  Boromir  bowed  his  head  as  the  boats  whirled 
by,  frail  and  fleeting  as  little  leaves,  under  the  enduring 
shadow  of  the  sentinels  of  Numenor.
I  don’t  ever  remember  feeling  so  wretched.’ 

‘My  heart’s  right  down  in  my  toes,  Mr.
Almost  it  seemed  that  the  words  took  shape,  and 
visions  of  far  lands  and  bright  things  that  he  had  never  yet 
imagined  opened  out  before  him;  and  the  firelit  hall  became 
like  a  golden  mist  above  seas  of  foam  that  sighed  upon  the 
margins  of  the  world.
Almost  above 
him  the  winged  shape  swerved.
They  had  been  going  for  several  hours  with  only  brief  halts, 
when  Gandalf  came  to  his  first  serious  check.
The  morning  was  now  far  advanced.
And  he  isn’t  worrying  about  us  either:  whether  we’ll  go 
along  with  him  or  no.
‘There  was  a  door  south-west  of  Caradhras,  some  fifteen 
miles  as  the  crow  flies,  and  maybe  twenty  as  the  wolf  runs,’ 
answered  Gandalf  grimly.
Venerable  he  seemed  as  a  king  crowned  with  many 
winters,  and  yet  hale  as  a  tried  warrior  in  the  fulness  of  his 
strength.
His  beard,  very  long  and  forked,  was 


MANY  MEETINGS 


297 


white,  nearly  as  white  as  the  snow-white  cloth  of  his  garments.
Let  me 
impress  on  you  once  more:  don’t  use  it!’ 

He  went  off  at  dawn.
If  we  seek  this,  we  shall  put  him  out  of 
reckoning.’ 

‘At  least  for  a  while,’  said  Elrond.
‘So  it  has  been  for  many  lives  of  men.
There  is  no  way  over  it 
below  its  sources  in  the  Ettenmoors,  except  by  the  Last 
Bridge  on  which  the  Road  crosses.’ 

‘What  is  that  other  river  we  can  see  far  away  there?’  asked 
Merry.
There  was 
Tom  Bombadil’s  house  before  them,  up,  down,  under  hill.
This  is  the  hour  of  the  Shire-folk, 
when  they  arise  from  their  quiet  fields  to  shake  the  towers 
and  counsels  of  the  Great.
When  your  ponies  stayed  with  me,  they  got  to  know 
my  Lumpkin;  and  they  smelt  him  in  the  night,  and  quickly 
ran  to  meet  him.
A  thin  black  smoke  trailed 
out.
At  the 
bottom,  upon  a  low  pedestal  carved  like  a  branching  tree, 
stood  a  basin  of  silver,  wide  and  shallow,  and  beside  it  stood 
a  silver  ewer.
‘Now,  now,  my  dear  hobbit!’  said  Gandalf.
The 
mountains  to  the  west  are  growing  evil;  to  the  east  the  lands 
are  waste,  and  full  of  Sauron’s  creatures;  and  it  is  rumoured 
that  we  cannot  now  safely  pass  southward  through  Rohan, 
and  the  mouths  of  the  Great  River  are  watched  by  the  Enemy.
Then  we  shall  see  what  we  shall  see.’ 

All  that  day  they  plodded  along,  until  the  cold  and  early 
evening  came  down.
‘Yes,’  she  said,  divining  his  thought,  ‘it  is  not  permitted  to 
speak  of  it,  and  Elrond  could  not  do  so.
You  agreed 
to  that,  you  remember.’ 

‘Well,  er,  yes,  I  suppose  so,’  stammered  Bilbo.
No,  something  else  drew  him 
away.
‘We  cannot  use  the  Ruling  Ring.
When 
autumn  came,  he  knew  that  part  at  least  of  his  heart  would 
think  more  kindly  of  journeying,  as  it  always  did  at  that 
season.
‘What 
were  the  Riders  trying  to  do?’ 

‘They  tried  to  pierce  your  heart  with  a  Morgul-knife  which 
remains  in  the  wound.
‘Down  in  a  clearing  in 
the  woods  not  far  below.
The  Maggots,  and  the  Puddifoots  of  Stock,  and 
most  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Marish,  were  house-dwellers; 
and  this  farm  was  stoutly  built  of  brick  and  had  a  high  wall 
all  round  it.
They  were  very  weary.
I  cannot  burn  snow.’ 

‘Well,’  said  Boromir,  ‘when  heads  are  at  a  loss  bodies  must 
serve,  as  we  say  in  my  country.
Pippin  was  evi¬ 
dently  much  enjoying  the  attention  he  was  getting,  and  had 
become  quite  forgetful  of  their  danger.
Their  spirits  rose  with  every  step.
‘But  when  the  Door 
opens  I  do  not  think  you  will  be  able  to  drag  your  Bill  inside, 
into  the  long  dark  of  Moria.
Butterbur  hurried  off  to  see  that  their  ponies  were  got 
ready,  and  to  fetch  them  a  ‘bite’.
An  old  man  was  driving  it  all 
alone.
‘Who  comes  hither  to  disturb  the  rest  of  Balin  Lord  of 
Moria?’  he  cried  in  a  loud  voice.
‘Not  a  “short  cut”,  I  hope,’  said  Pippin.
Then  he  put  the  ring  on 
his  finger.
Il8  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

Frodo  propped  his  back  against  the  tree-trunk,  and  closed 
his  eyes.
Stone  rings  grinned  out  of  the  ground 
like  broken  teeth  in  the  moonlight.
‘I  look  foul  and  feel  fair.
‘Ever  since  Bilbo  left  I  have  been  deeply  concerned  about 
you,  and  about  all  these  charming,  absurd,  helpless  hobbits.
We  have  done  nothing  to  ease  you,  as  we  ought, 
though  all  the  ores  of  Moria  were  after  us.
‘Hush!’  whispered  Strider.
Soon  the  River  broadened  and 
grew  more  shallow;  long  stony  beaches  lay  upon  the  east,  and 
there  were  gravel-shoals  in  the  water,  so  that  careful  steering 
was  needed.
It  was  on  Monday,  and  all  the  dogs  were  yammering 
and  the  geese  screaming.
‘I  hope  we  shall  meet  again 


236 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


some  day,  when  things  are  merry  once  more,’  said  Frodo.
Why  did  you  let  me  keep 
it?
Sam  sank  back  into  gloom.
We’ll  hear  anything  on  the  road 
long  before  we  meet  it  tonight.’ 


126 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


It  was  five  miles  or  more  from  Maggot’s  lane  to  the  Ferry.
/ 
have  called  you  all  together  for  a  Purpose.
He  sought  me  in  good  faith,  and  so  persuaded 
me.
But  going  straight,  without  mishap  or  losing  our 
way,  we  shall  take  three  or  four  marches,  I  expect.
‘Steady,  Gamgee!’  he  said.
I  have  seen  him.’ 

‘You  have  seen  Gollum?’  exclaimed  Frodo  in  amazement.
But  there  is 
no  other  way  out  that  I  can  see  or  think  of.’ 

There  being  nothing  else  for  it,  they  filed  out,  and  Merry 
led  them  to  the  path  that  he  had  discovered.
Sam  is  an  excellent  fellow,  and  would  jump  down  a  dragon’s 
throat  to  save  you,  if  he  did  not  trip  over  his  own  feet;  but 
you  will  need  more  than  one  companion  in  your  dangerous 
adventure.’ 

‘My  dear  and  most  beloved  hobbits!’  said  Frodo  deeply 
moved.
He  heard  behind  his  head  a  creaking  and  scraping  sound.
To  all  but  Sam  he  pretended  he  was 
going  to  settle  down  there  permanently.
Maggot  jumped  down  and  stood  holding  the  ponies’  heads, 
and  peering  forward  into  the  gloom.
The  power  of  the  Black 
Land  grows  and  we  are  hard  beset.
‘I  wonder  how  long  I 
have  been  away.
‘The  Barrow-wights  we  know  by  many  names;  and  of  the 
Old  Forest  many  tales  have  been  told:  all  that  now  remains 
is  but  an  outlier  of  its  northern  march.
“Radagast  the  Bird-tamer!
Very  tall  they  were,  and  the  Lady  no  less  tall  than  the 
Lord;  and  they  were  grave  and  beautiful.
I 
have  a  fancy  it  would  turn  even  the  knives  of  the  Black 
Riders,’  he  ended  in  a  low  voice.
I  wonder  if  I  shall  ever  see 
him  again.’ 

‘So  do  I,’  said  Gandalf.
In  a 
twinkling  the  table  was  laid.
They  made  an  undulating  ridge, 
often  rising  almost  to  a  thousand  feet,  and  here  and  there 
falling  again  to  low  clefts  or  passes  leading  into  the  eastern 
land  beyond.
Yet  we  would  not  have  it  otherwise.
We  have  lugged  up  your 


448 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


blankets  as  well  as  our  own.
Do  you  not 
see  now  wherefore  your  coming  is  to  us  as  the  footstep  of 
Doom?
At  last  with  an  effort  he  spoke, 
and  wondered  to  hear  his  own  words,  as  if  some  other  will 
was  using  his  small  voice.
They  all 
looked,  and  on  the  edge  high  above  them  they  saw  against 
the  sky  a  horse  standing.
‘Nor  do  any  of  us  see  clearly.
He  used  often  to  say  there  was  only  one  Road; 
that  it  was  like  a  great  river:  its  springs  were  at  every  doorstep, 
and  every  path  was  its  tributary.
It  now  appeared  plain  and  smooth,  without  mark  or  device 
that  he  could  see.
They  looked  hard  at  one  another.
What  a  pity  that  Bilbo  did  not  stab  that 
vile  creature,  when  he  had  a  chance!’ 

‘Pity?
On  foot  even  Glorfindel  and 
Aragorn  together  could  not  withstand  all  the  Nine  at  once.
O  Elbereth!
We  slept  late;  and  there  are  a  good  many 
miles  to  go.’ 

‘  You  slept  late,  you  mean,’  said  Pippin.
But  I 
hoped  to  draw  some  of  them  off,  and  yet  reach  Rivendell 
ahead  of  you  and  send  out  help.
‘It  is  grim  reading,’  he  said.
Iam  leaving  NOW.
The  round  Moon  rolled  behind  the  hill 
as  the  Sun  raised  up  her  head.
He 
chose  for  himself  from  the  pile  a  brooch  set  with  blue  stones, 
many-shaded  like  flax-flowers  or  the  wings  of  blue  butterflies.
But’  -  and  here  he 
looked  hard  at  Sam  -  ‘if  you  really  care  about  me,  you  will 
keep  that  dead  secret.
The  merry  voice  of  Pippin 
came  to  him.
Two  days  ago  I  found  it,  and 
followed  it  over  the  Bridge;  and  today  I  marked  where  you 
descended  from  the  hills  again.
He  staggered  and  fell, 
grasped  vainly  at  the  stone,  and  slid  into  the  abyss.
Mr.
The  afternoon  was  getting  late,  and 
he  thought  this  sudden  sleepiness  uncanny.
The  arm  let  go  of  Frodo,  and  Sam  pulled  him  away,  crying 
out  for  help.
He  had  not  gone  far  before 
Aragorn  was  out  of  sight  ahead.
I  can’t  see  any  sign  of  them.’ 

‘Dwarf-doors  are  not  made  to  be  seen  when  shut,’  said 
Gimli.
And  I  made  a 
nice  imitation  of  your  head  with  a  brown  woollen  mat,  Mr.
He  wished  bitterly  that 
his  fortune  had  left  him  in  the  quiet  and  beloved  Shire.
Broken  and  rusty  chains  lay  at  the  edge  and  trailed 
down  into  the  black  pit.
Tom  now  told  them  that 
he  reckoned  the  Sun  would  shine  tomorrow,  and  it  would  be 
a  glad  morning,  and  setting  out  would  be  hopeful.
At  last  Frodo  spoke  with  hesita¬ 
tion.
‘I  doubt  it,’  said  the  landlord  unhappily.
Fancy  that  ring  of  mine  causing  such  a  disturbance!
There  was  a  ring  and  clatter  as 
the  Company  drew  their  swords.
Almost  Frodo 
fancied  that  he  could  hear  a  voice  singing,  mingled  with 
the  sound  of  the  water.
“It  serves  as  a  beginning.
Baggins.
They  sat  huddled  together.
‘If  you  want  my  advice,  make  for 
Rivendell.
I  am  going  to  the 
top,  to  the  Seat  of  Amon  Hen,  to  see  what  may  be  seen.
The 
left  hand  of  each  was  raised  palm  outwards  in  gesture  of 
warning;  in  each  right  hand  there  was  an  axe;  upon  each  head 
there  was  a  crumbling  helm  and  crown.
‘Then  you  haven’t  seen  him?’  said  the  farmer.
The  Elves  were  gone.
Its  sides  were  now  dark  and 
sullen,  and  its  head  was  in  grey  cloud.
‘But  handsome 
is  as  handsome  does,  as  we  say  in  the  Shire;  and  I  daresay 
we  shall  all  look  much  the  same  after  lying  for  days  in  hedges 
and  ditches.’ 

‘It  would  take  more  than  a  few  days,  or  weeks,  or  years,  of 
wandering  in  the  Wild  to  make  you  look  like  Strider,’  he 
answered.
He  was  very  close  with  one  of  the 
Southern  strangers,  and  they  slipped  out  together  just  after 


216 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


your  “accident”.
He 
jumped  up  and  went  out.
Then  it  faded  into  the  West,  and  dusk 
came  early,  followed  by  a  grey  and  starless  night.
Their  mattresses  and  pillows  were  soft  as  down,  and  the 
blankets  were  of  white  wool.
‘Ow!’  he  cried.
Bilbo  is  free  with 
his  money,  and  there  seems  no  lack  of  it;  but  I  know  of  no 
tunnel-making.
There 
was  Bree-blood  in  the  Brandybucks  by  all  accounts.
‘I  don’t  know  what  it  is,’  he  said,  ‘but  I  suddenly  felt  afraid.
‘If  we  had  come  by  the  main  road  down  from  the  upper 
halls,  we  should  have  been  trapped  here,’  said  Gandalf.
‘Yes,’  said  Bilbo.
My  hearties!’  He  drew  back  the 
yellow  curtains,  and  the  hobbits  saw  that  these  had  covered 
the  windows,  at  either  end  of  the  room,  one  looking  east  and 
the  other  looking  west.
Doom,  doom-.
‘What  have  I  said?’  he  cried.
How  I  hate 
this  foul  pool!’  He  stooped  and  picking  up  a  large  stone  he 
cast  it  far  into  the  dark  water.
‘And  you,  Ring-bearer,’  she  said,  turning  to  Frodo.
We  shall  meet  bitter 
cold,  if  no  worse,  before  we  come  down  on  the  other  side.
But  as  for  breaking  the  Ring,  force  is  useless.
Did  you  not  say  that  you  wished  to  see 
Elf-magic?’ 

‘I  did,’  said  Sam,  trembling  a  little  between  fear  and  curi¬ 
osity.
‘There  is 
a  fire  in  the  hall,  and  food  for  hungry  guests,’  said  an  Elf 
standing  before  him.
Peregrin.
‘Durin’s  Bane!’  he  cried,  and 
letting  his  axe  fall  he  covered  his  face.
Their  enemies  were  routed  and  did  not 
return.
Gandalf  seemed  pleased.
Butterbur?’  asked  Frodo.
‘And  where  will  they  five?
‘So  there 
you  are  at  last!’  said  Merry.
Nonetheless 
as  the  night  wore  on  Aragorn  grew  uneasy,  tossing  often  in 
his  sleep  and  waking.
Find  it,  and  three  rings  that  the  Dwarf-sires  possessed  of  old 
shall  be  returned  to  you,  and  the  realm  of  Moria  shall  be 
yours  for  ever.
His  eyes  seemed 
closed,  but  under  the  lids  he  was  watching  Frodo  intently.
He  had  indeed  privately  made  up  his  mind  to  leave 
on  his  fiftieth  birthday:  Bilbo’s  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
eighth.
‘But  quite  long,  I  should  think.
It  is  hard  upon  the  Dwarf  to  be  thus 
singled  out.
I  longed  to  disappear.’ 

‘Don’t  do  that!’  said  Gandalf,  sitting  down.
It  showed 
grey  and  pale,  a  line  of  fading  light  through  the  wood.
It  was  lit  by  silver  lamps 
that  swung  from  the  boughs  of  trees,  and  it  fell  into  a  basin 
of  silver,  from  which  a  white  stream  spilled.
But  there  are  also  several  newer 
tracks  that  were  not  made  by  Rangers.
I  had  come 
back  again  and  was  standing  just  outside  the  light  of  the 
lamp  looking  at  the  stars.
Elves,  who  seldom  walked  in  the  Shire,  could  now 
be  seen  passing  westward  through  the  woods  in  the  evening, 
passing  and  not  returning;  but  they  were  leaving  Middle-earth 
and  were  no  longer  concerned  with  its  troubles.
But  it  is  hard!
His  expression  quickly  changed,  and 
he  ate  all  the  rest  of  the  cake  with  relish.
‘Fling  fuel  on  the  fire!’  cried  Gandalf  to  the  hobbits.
When  you  came  north,  Boromir, 
you  were  in  the  Enemy’s  eyes  only  one  stray  wanderer  from 
the  South  and  a  matter  of  small  concern  to  him:  his  mind 
was  busy  with  the  pursuit  of  the  Ring.
It’s  time  he  was  his  own  master 
now.’ 

‘Everything?’  said  Gandalf.
The  Bree-folk,  Big  and  Little,  did  not  themselves  travel 
much;  and  the  affairs  of  the  four  villages  were  their  chief 
concern.
480  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

Do  not  trouble  your  hearts  overmuch  with  thought  of  the 
road  tonight.
He  greatly  desires  it  -  but  he  must  not  get  it.’ 

Frodo  sat  silent  and  motionless.
‘I  am  afraid  we  must  go  back  to  the  Road  here  for  a  while,’ 
said  Strider.
I  do  a  lot  of  that  nowadays,  and 
this  is  the  best  place  to  do  it  in,  as  a  rule.
‘It  was  no  ordinary 
storm.
And  no 
sign  of  Gandalf.
He  wished  with  all  his  heart  that  he  was  back 
there,  and  in  those  days,  mowing  the  lawn,  or  pottering 
among  the  flowers,  and  that  he  had  never  heard  of  Moria,  or 
mithril  -  or  the  Ring.
It  may  have  been  only  a 
trick  of  the  wind  in  the  cracks  and  gullies  of  the  rocky  wall, 
but  the  sounds  were  those  of  shrill  cries,  and  wild  howls  of 
laughter.
‘Elrond 
knew  what  he  was  about  when  he  wanted  to  send  Mr.
The  sky  was  clear  and  the  stars  were  growing  bright.
He  built  (and  excavated)  Brandy  Hall, 
changed  his  name  to  Brandybuck,  and  settled  down  to 
become  master  of  what  was  virtually  a  small  independent 
country.
‘Gandalf  the  Grey 
set  out  with  the  Company,  but  he  did  not  pass  the  borders 
of  this  land.
And  yet 
not  so  many,  nor  so  fair,  as  when  Thangorodrim  was  broken, 
and  the  Elves  deemed  that  evil  was  ended  for  ever,  and  it  was 
not  so.’ 

‘You  remember?’  said  Frodo,  speaking  his  thought  aloud 
in  his  astonishment.
Though  the  Company  was  well  clad,  they  seldom  felt  warm, 
either  moving  or  at  rest.
Bilbo  must  have  translated  it.
THE  BRIDGE  OF  KHAZAD-DUM  423 

Suddenly,  and  to  his  own  surprise,  Frodo  felt  a  hot  wrath 
blaze  up  in  his  heart.
Funny  it  was  anyway.’ 

‘Well,  what  was  it?’  said  Frodo,  knowing  that  Sam  would 
not  settle  down  until  he  had  told  his  tale,  whatever  it  was.
‘We  must  not  get  shut  in.
‘Ropes  indeed!’  answered  an  Elf  from  the  boats.
I  don’t  suppose  we  could  hire  them, 
but  we  might  be  able  to  buy  them,’  he  added,  doubtfully, 
wondering  if  he  could  afford  it.
A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


399 


for  particular  persons;  and  some  have  locks  and  keys  that  are 
still  needed  when  all  necessary  times  and  words  are  known.
Come  derry  dol!
For  I  have  many 
eyes  in  my  service,  and  I  believe  that  you  know  where  this 
precious  thing  now  lies.
‘Boro- 
mir!
‘Heavy  have  the  hearts  of  our  chieftains  been  since  that 
night.
I  had  only  to  speak  the 
Elvish  word  for  friend  and  the  doors  opened.
Dear  Frodo, 

Bad  news  has  reached  me  here.
Anxiety  was  intense.
Raising  his  right  hand  he  said  in  a  clear  and 
commanding  voice: 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS 


I87 


Wake  now  my  merry  lads!
I 
will  follow  your  lead  now  -  if  this  last  warning  does  not  move 
you.
Frodo  dodged  aside  and  again  put  the  stone  between  them.
They  laughed.’ 

‘Who  are  they,  and  what  are  you  talking  about?’ 

‘The  Elves,  sir.
‘That  is  the  signal  for  supper!’  said  Bilbo.
Right  between  the  shadow 
of  the  trees  there  was  a  smooth  space,  and  over  this  he  passed 
his  hands  to  and  fro,  muttering  words  under  his  breath.
‘I  am  a  true 
man,  neither  thief  nor  tracker.
‘All  the  top  of  your  hill  is  full  of 
tunnels  packed  with  chests  of  gold  and  silver,  and  jools,  by 
what  I’ve  heard.’ 

‘Then  you’ve  heard  more  than  I  can  speak  to,’  answered 
the  Gaffer.
There  was  a  hurrying  sound  of  many  feet.
Sam 
sat  wide-mouthed  staring  at  him  dumbly.
Gandalf  for  that 
matter.
‘But  there  is  no  time  for  wonder.
‘I  know,’  he  said.
In  the  last  few  days  the 
poor  beast  had  improved  wonderfully;  it  already  seemed  fat¬ 
ter  and  stronger,  and  had  begun  to  show  an  affection  for  its 
new  masters,  especially  for  Sam.
I  am  fright¬ 
fully  glad  to  see  you  safe  and  sound.’  He  paused  and  looked 
at  Frodo  doubtfully.
But  even  as  it  fell  it  swung  its 
whip,  and  the  thongs  lashed  and  curled  about  the  wizard’s 
knees,  dragging  him  to  the  brink.
Even  as 
they  sat  and  stood,  as  if  suddenly  frozen,  it  was  answered  by 
another  cry,  fainter  and  further  off,  but  no  less  chilling  to  the 
blood.
The  black  shadow  stood  close 
to  the  point  where  they  had  left  the  path,  and  it  swayed  from 
side  to  side.
Most  of  them 
bore  the  mark  dale  on  them;  which  did  not  convey  much  to 
most  of  the  hobbits,  but  they  all  agreed  they  were  marvellous 
crackers.
When 
everything  was  set  in  order,  all  the  lights  in  the  room  were 
put  out,  except  one  lamp  and  a  pair  of  candles  at  each  end 
of  the  chimney-shelf.
‘It  is  as  plain  as  my  nose  that  no 
accident  brought  you  and  that  rider  here  on  the  same  after¬ 
noon;  and  maybe  my  news  was  no  great  news  to  you,  after 
all.
They  are  Elvish  robes 
certainly,  if  that  is  what  you  mean.
Gandalf  walked  in  front  as  before.
446  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

Out  of  the  shadows  a  ladder  was  let  down:  it  was  made  of 
rope,  silver-grey  and  glimmering  in  the  dark,  and  though  it 
looked  slender  it  proved  strong  enough  to  bear  many  men.
Be  glad,  my  merry  friends, 
and  let  the  warm  sunlight  heat  now  heart  and  limb!
‘What  do  you  call  him  that  for?’ 

‘They  call  me  that  in  Bree,’  said  Strider  laughing,  ‘and  that 
is  how  I  was  introduced  to  him.’ 

‘And  why  do  you  call  him  Dunadan?’  asked  Frodo.
‘Don’t  worry  about  me!’  he  added.
He’s  in  and  out  of  Bag  End.
The  distance  was  greater  than  it  had  looked.
Before  long  Frodo  was  obliged  to  dismount  and 
struggle  along  on  foot.
Neither 
Tom  nor  Goldberry  were  there.
They  set  no  watch;  even  Frodo  feared 
no  danger  yet,  for  they  were  still  in  the  heart  of  the  Shire.
Many  of  them  had  indeed  been  ordered  a  year  before, 
and  had  come  all  the  way  from  the  Mountain  and  from  Dale, 
and  were  of  real  dwarf-make.
‘That 
would  indeed  be  a  burden,’  she  added  in  a  low  voice,  as  if  to 
herself.
‘Whew!’  he  said  to  Pippin.
He  took  to  thieving,  and  going  about  muttering  to  him¬ 
self,  and  gurgling  in  his  throat.
I  made  up  my  mind  months  ago,  and  I  haven’t 
changed  it.
Milo  never  answered  letters.
Frodo  remained  long  awake,  talking  with 
Gildor.
A  little  later  Frodo  came  out  of  the  study  to  see 
how  things  were  going  on,  and  found  her  still  about  the  place, 
investigating  nooks  and  corners,  and  tapping  the  floors.
‘Instead  of  throwing  him 
out,  and  clapping  him  in  chains,  Elrond  goes  and  rewards 
him  for  his  cheek!’ 

‘Rewards!’  said  Frodo.
When  I  at  last  got  the  truth  out  of  him, 
I  saw  at  once  that  he  had  been  trying  to  put  his  claim  to  the 
ring  beyond  doubt.
They  stood  up  to  greet  their  guests,  after  the 
manner  of  Elves,  even  those  who  were  accounted  mighty 
kings.
‘For  you  are  still  afraid,  perhaps,  of  mist 
and  tree-shadows  and  deep  water,  and  untame  things.
‘The  Three  we  know  of.
‘Lie  flat  and  still!’  hissed  Aragorn,  pulling  Sam  down  into 
the  shade  of  a  holly-bush;  for  a  whole  regiment  of  birds  had 
broken  away  suddenly  from  the  main  host,  and  came,  flying 
low,  straight  towards  the  ridge.
Elves 
may  see  things  otherwise.
‘I  will  follow  you  into  every  bog 
and  ditch.
I  suppose  not.
The  black  shadow  straightened  up  and 
retreated.
‘Behold!
‘Don’t  stop!’  said  Merry.
You  are  near 
the  borders  of  the  Shire  now.
There  were  no  trees  after  all.
Poor  Mr.
No  trees 
grew  there,  and  it  lay  open  to  the  sky.
Back  to  the  boats,  Sam,  like  lightning!’ 

Sam  turned  and  bolted  back  down  the  path.
‘I  don’t  know,’  answered  Frodo.
‘It  must  be  put  out 
and  not  lit  again.’ 

‘Well  if  that  isn’t  a  plague  and  a  nuisance!’  said  Pippin.
It  took  a  long  while  to  satisfy  her,  as  she  had  brought  a 
complete  inventory  with  her  and  went  right  through  it.
‘It  is  quite  cool,’  said  Gandalf.
If  I 
am  right,  tomorrow  we  may  actually  see  the  morning  peeping 
in.
On  the  benches  were  various 
folic:  men  of  Bree,  a  collection  of  local  hobbits  (sitting 
chattering  together),  a  few  more  dwarves,  and  other  vague 
figures  difficult  to  make  out  away  in  the  shadows  and  corners.
Stray  but  a  little  and 
it  will  fail,  to  the  ruin  of  all.
‘Time  passed  with  many  cares,  until  my  doubts  were  awak¬ 
ened  again  to  sudden  fear.
‘Fruitless  did  I  call  the  victory  of  the  Last  Alliance?
And  if  you  have  not  yet  cast 
your  story  into  verse,  you  may  tell  it  in  plain  words.
‘What’s  that?’  gasped  Pippin  at 
the  same  moment.
‘Some  folk  have  all  the  luck,’  they  said;  but  it  was 
not  until  Frodo  approached  the  usually  more  sober  age  of 
fifty  that  they  began  to  think  it  queer.
At  the  end  of  an  hour  they  had  gone  a  mile,  or  maybe  a 
little  more,  and  had  descended  many  flights  of  stairs.
Gandalf  was  thinking  of  a  spring,  nearly  eighty  years 
before,  when  Bilbo  had  run  out  of  Bag  End  without  a  hand¬ 
kerchief.
When  thir¬ 
teen  had  fallen  the  rest  fled  shrieking,  leaving  the  defenders 
unharmed,  except  for  Sam  who  had  a  scratch  along  the  scalp.
Could  I  not  have 
a  sight  of  it  again?’ 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  519 

Frodo  looked  up.
When  all  was  ready  Aragorn  led  them  on  a  trial  up 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


485 


the  Silverlode.
he’s  coming  with 
you,  just  to  set  you  on  the  road;  so  he  needs  a  pony.
It  was  Mr.
The  clouds  were  still  thick,  but  they  were  breaking,  and  pale 
strips  of  blue  appeared  between  them.
Bilbo  Baggins  has  gone  away;  as  far  as 
I  know,  for  good.’  Some  of  the  visitors  he  invited  to  come 
inside,  as  Bilbo  had  left  ‘messages’  for  them.
But  I’ll  do  what  I  can.
‘Only  for  a  short  while,  I  hope,’  he 
said.
Much  like  Gollum  with  his  “birthday- 
present”.
They  were  out  of  breath  and  seemed 
rather  scared.
From  the  high  place 
they  looked  back  westwards  over  the  lower  lands.
He  could  not  make  out  what  it  said,  but  he 
heard  the  Gaffer’s  answers,  which  were  rather  shrill.
‘Even 
if  he  was  a  day  or  two  behind  us  at  Bree,  he  could  have 
arrived  here  first.
You 
would  be  slain  before  you  saw  them.’ 

Gimli  drew  his  axe  from  his  belt.
‘But  I  must  have  something  to 
work  on.
It  is  no  more  than  a  furlong  off,  I  guess.’ 

‘Then  let  us  force  a  path  thither,  you  and  I!’  said  Aragorn.
Good  night!’  She  passed  out  of  the  room  with  a  glimmer  and 
a  rustle.
‘I  was  in  the  company  that  held  the  bridge,  until  it  was  cast 
down  behind  us.
First  of  all,  to  tell  you  that  I  am 
immensely  fond  of  you  all,  and  that  eleventy-one  years  is  too 
short  a  time  to  live  among  such  excellent  and  admirable  hobbits.
‘Come,  come,  my  friend!’  said 
Boromir  in  a  softer  voice.
Perhaps  Sam  could  dig  some¬ 
thing  out  of  his  memory.’ 

‘Come  on,  Sam!’  said  Merry.
‘No,  Mr.
He  drew,  but  his  hand  fell, 
and  the  arrow  slipped  to  the  ground.
Not  even  my  uncle  Andy  ever  did  a  trick  like 
that!’ 

When  at  length  all  the  Company  was  gathered  on  the  east 
bank  of  the  Silverlode,  the  Elves  untied  the  ropes  and  coiled 
two  of  them.
They  are  not  natives  here;  they 
are  crebain  out  of  Fangorn  and  Dunland.
They  had  been  two  days  in  this  country  when  the  weather 
turned  wet.
The  voice  of  Legolas  faltered,  and  the  song  ceased.
‘Mr.
He  was  white  and  shaking 
when  they  left  him.’ 


228 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘We  seem  to  have  enemies  all  round,’  said  Frodo.
‘I  will  say  no  more  yet.’ 

‘This  is  bad!’  cried  Sam,  jumping  up.
Merry!
And  if  that  was  not  enough  for  fame,  there  was  also 
his  prolonged  vigour  to  marvel  at.
They  halted,  wondering  what  to 
do.
They 
looked  back  and  saw  the  top  of  the  old  mound  on  the  hill, 
and  from  it  the  sunlight  on  the  gold  went  up  like  a  yellow 
flame.
‘You  say  that  you  are  afraid.
Before  his  feet  they  saw  a  large  round  hole  like  the  mouth  of 
a  well.
It  would  be  wise  if  you  accustomed 
yourselves  to  stepping  in  and  out,  here  where  there  is  a 
landing-place,  before  you  set  off  downstream.’ 

The  Company  was  arranged  in  this  way:  Aragorn,  Frodo, 
and  Sam  were  in  one  boat;  Boromir,  Merry,  and  Pippin  in 
another;  and  in  the  third  were  Legolas  and  Gimli,  who  had 
now  become  fast  friends.
He  came,  but 
he  escaped  and  was  not  found.
There  messages  reached  me  tell¬ 
ing  me  of  war  and  defeat  in  Gondor,  and  when  I  heard  of 
the  Black  Shadow  a  chill  smote  my  heart.
There  was  no  light.
This 
night  we  must  all  be  sleepless!
And  that  Ranger,  Strider,  he’s  been  asking 


220 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


questions,  too.
As  they  lay  in  their  camp 
that  day  Aragorn  watched  the  flights  doubtfully,  wondering 
if  Gollum  had  been  doing  some  mischief  and  the  news  of 
their  voyage  was  now  moving  in  the  wilderness.
As  quickly  as  they  could  they  scrambled  off  the  beaten 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


273 


way  and  up  into  the  deep  heather  and  bilberry  brushwood 
on  the  slopes  above,  until  they  came  to  a  small  patch  of 
thick-growing  hazels.
But  this  very  year,  in  the  days  of  June,  sudden  war 
came  upon  us  out  of  Mordor,  and  we  were  swept  away.
The  dark 
water  boiled,  and  there  was  a  hideous  stench.
Since  then 
I  have  searched  for  your  trail.
Elrond  is  a  master  of  healing,  but  the  weapons 
of  our  Enemy  are  deadly.
‘Yes,  it  is  Elves,’  said  Frodo.
‘Let  us  go,  before  the 
troll  returns!’ 

But  even  as  they  retreated,  and  before  Pippin  and  Merry 
had  reached  the  stair  outside,  a  huge  orc-chieftain,  almost 
man-high,  clad  in  black  mail  from  head  to  foot,  leaped  into 
the  chamber;  behind  him  his  followers  clustered  in  the  door¬ 
way.
Then  do  not  be  too  eager  to  deal  out  death  in  judge¬ 
ment.
His  hair  was  dark  as  the  shadows  of 
twilight,  and  upon  it  was  set  a  circlet  of  silver;  his  eyes  were 
grey  as  a  clear  evening,  and  in  them  was  a  light  like  the  light 
of  stars.
When  they  caught  his  words  again  they  found  that  he  had 
now  wandered  into  strange  regions  beyond  their  memory  and 
beyond  their  waking  thought,  into  times  when  the  world  was 
wider,  and  the  seas  flowed  straight  to  the  western  Shore;  and 
still  on  and  back  Tom  went  singing  out  into  ancient  starlight, 
when  only  the  Elf-sires  were  awake.
Sweet  is  the  sound  of  falling  rain, 
and  the  brook  that  leaps  from  hill  to  plain; 
but  better  than  rain  or  rippling  streams 
is  Water  Hot  that  smokes  and  steams.
You  shall  go,’  said  Elrond,  and  he  sighed.
In  fact,  I  confess  that  I 
spied.
‘I  know  what  it  was  that  you  last  saw,’  she  said;  ‘for  that  is 
also  in  my  mind.
At  once  a  great 
spout  of  green  and  blue  flame  sprang  out,  and  the  wood 
flared  and  sputtered.
‘Henceforward  I  will  call  nothing 
fair,  unless  it  be  her  gift.’  He  put  his  hand  to  his  breast.
But  now  we  are  safe!’ 

Gandalf  looked  quickly  at  Frodo,  but  he  had  shut  his  eyes.
They  were  in  a  wide  hall  with 
doors  on  either  side;  in  front  of  them  a  passage  ran  back 
down  the  middle  of  the  house.
The  Man  in  the  Moon  took  another  mug, 
and  then  rolled  beneath  his  chair; 

And  there  he  dozed  and  dreamed  of  ale, 

Till  in  the  sky  the  stars  were  pale, 
and  dawn  was  in  the  air.
‘Have  you  got  it  here?’  he  asked  in  a  whisper.
‘ Cram ,’  he  said  under  his  breath,  as  he  broke  off  a  crisp 
corner  and  nibbled  at  it.
‘Let  none 
say  again  that  Dwarves  are  grasping  and  ungracious!
Mugwort!’  said  the  landlord,  looking 
puzzled.
For  not  in  doing 
or  contriving,  nor  in  choosing  between  this  course  and 
another,  can  I  avail;  but  only  in  knowing  what  was  and  is, 
and  in  part  also  what  shall  be.
But  now,  my  jolly 
Lumpkin,  old  Tom’s  going  to  ride.
‘There!’  said  Merry.
Since  you  are  here  we  must  risk  the  peril  of 
the  Road  and  go.
Too  wet  for  hobbit-folk  -  let  them  rest 
while  they  are  able!
The  Gap  of  Rohan  is  closed 
to  us  while  we  go  with  the  Bearer.
I  hope  we  get  a  chance  of  telling 
him  about  it!
And  then,  by  fortune,  I  came  suddenly  on  what  I  sought:  the 
marks  of  soft  feet  beside  a  muddy  pool.
But  what  was  lost  may  yet  be 
found,  he  thinks.
Let  us  call  him  back  and  then  vote!
Look  to  the  boat!
The  breathing  of  the  sleepers 
could  be  plainly  heard.
If  we  win  through  to  the  house  of  Elrond,  you  may  hear  it 
there,  told  in  full.’ 

‘Then  tell  us  some  other  tale  of  the  old  days,’  begged  Sam; 
‘a  tale  about  the  Elves  before  the  fading  time.
But  it  makes  the  darkness  seem  heavier, 
thinking  of  all  those  lamps.
Even  so  they  often  despaired  of  getting 
their  pony  up,  or  indeed  of  finding  a  path  for  themselves, 
burdened  as  they  were.
‘I  have  heard  both,’  said  Gandalf;  ‘and  I  will  not  give 
judgement  now.
‘Tomorrow  we  must  journey  by  day  again.
‘You  shall  ride  my  horse,’  said  Glorfindel.
So  overjoyed  was  I  by  the  news  that 
I  got  out  of  him,  when  he  stopped  quaking,  that  I  embraced 
the  old  fellow.
‘I  fear  those  Black  Riders, 
and  I  am  sure  it  is  unsafe  to  stay  in  one  place  long,  especially 
in  a  place  to  which  it  is  known  I  was  going.
It  was  not  so  when 
last  I  was  in  that  land.’ 

‘Nor  is  it  now,  I  will  swear,’  said  Boromir.
We  must  go  with  all  the  speed  that  we  can.
If  he  was  considering  what  word  would  close  the 
gate  again  from  within,  there  was  no  need.
‘Sit  now  beside  my  chair,  Frodo  of  the  Shire!’  said  Cele¬ 
born.
His  malice  is  great  and  gives  him  a  strength  hardly 
to  be  believed  in  one  so  lean  and  withered.
Underhill?
There  is  the  greatest  wind-drift 
of  all  just  beyond  the  turn,  and  there  our  Strong  Men  were 
almost  buried.
The  Elves  all  burst  into  song.
‘That  was  nigh  on  thirty  years  ago.
Frodo’s  party 
was  over,  and  Gandalf  had  not  come.
Then  Frodo  felt  himself  falling,  and 
the  roaring  and  confusion  seemed  to  rise  and  engulf  him 
together  with  his  enemies.
‘But  I  have  a  sense  of 
watchfulness,  and  of  fear,  that  I  have  never  had  here  before.’ 

‘Then  we  must  be  more  careful,’  said  Gandalf.
He  did  not  omit  a  single  riddle.
With  a  shattering  echo  they  slammed, 
and  all  light  was  lost.
They  halted  under  an  elm  tree:  its  leaves 
though  fast  turning  yellow  were  still  thick,  and  the  ground  at 
its  feet  was  fairly  dry  and  sheltered.
‘I  believed  that  you  were  a  friend  before  the  letter  came,’ 
he  said,  ‘or  at  least  I  wished  to.
In  the  midst  of 
this  they  lit  a  fire,  for  there  was  no  hope  that  darkness  and 
silence  would  keep  their  trail  from  discovery  by  the  hunting 
packs.
STRIDER 


227 


One  was  muttering;  and  the  other  was  whispering,  or  hissing.
Also  we  crave  the  advice 
of  Elrond.
‘It  looks  just  the  same  as  ever  it  did.’ 

‘Well,  I  should  just  like  to  see  it  for  a  moment,’  said  Bilbo.
‘Short  cuts  make  delays,  but 
inns  make  longer  ones.
‘All  know 
in  Gondor  that  he  went  first  to  Minas  Anor  and  dwelt  a 
while  with  his  nephew  Meneldil,  instructing  him,  before  he 
committed  to  him  the  rule  of  the  South  Kingdom.
It  comes  down  out  of  the  Downs  and 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


149 


flows  south-west  through  the  midst  of  the  Forest  to  join  the 
Brandywine  below  Haysend.
They  do  not  fear 
the  Ringwraiths,  for  those  who  have  dwelt  in  the  Blessed 
Realm  live  at  once  in  both  worlds,  and  against  both  the  Seen 
and  the  Unseen  they  have  great  power.’ 

‘I  thought  that  I  saw  a  white  figure  that  shone  and  did  not 
grow  dim  like  the  others.
And  don’t  get  mixed  up  with  these  outlandish  folk.
They  are  not  good,  but  only  here  have  I  learned 
how  evil  they  may  seem  to  this  company.
But  you  need  ask  no 
questions.
Hee  now!
A  great  dread  fell  on  him,  as  if  he  was  awaiting  the 
pronouncement  of  some  doom  that  he  had  long  foreseen  and 
vainly  hoped  might  after  all  never  be  spoken.
He  was  slipping  forward.
Frodo  this  morning.
‘They  were  terrible  to  behold!
But  good  luck  to  you 
-  today  and  every  day!’ 

‘If  there  are  no  worse  things  ahead  than  the  Old  Forest,  I 
shall  be  lucky,’  said  Frodo.
No  gleam  came  from  the  blades  of  Sting  or  of 
Glamdring;  and  that  was  some  comfort,  for  being  the  work 
of  Elvish  smiths  in  the  Elder  Days  these  swords  shone  with 
a  cold  light,  if  any  Ores  were  near  at  hand.
Have  you  decided  what  to  do?’ 

‘No!’  answered  Frodo,  coming  back  to  himself  out  of  dark¬ 
ness,  and  finding  to  his  surprise  that  it  was  not  dark,  and  that 
out  of  the  window  he  could  see  the  sunlit  garden.
Down  again 
the  path  went,  and  then  up  again,  up  a  long  smooth  hillside 
of  turf,  towards  the  light.
Eaten 
after  that  draught  the  stale  bread  and  dried  fruit  (which  was 
now  all  that  they  had  left)  seemed  to  satisfy  their  hunger 
better  than  many  a  good  breakfast  in  the  Shire  had  done.
The  Shire -hobbits  referred  to  those  of 
Bree,  and  to  any  others  that  lived  beyond  the  borders,  as 
Outsiders,  and  took  very  little  interest  in  them,  considering 
them  dull  and  uncouth.
All  shall 
love  me  and  despair!’ 

She  lifted  up  her  hand  and  from  the  ring  that  she  wore 
there  issued  a  great  light  that  illumined  her  alone  and  left  all 
else  dark.
‘In  that 
land,  maybe,  we  were  in  a  time  that  has  elsewhere  long  gone 
by.
Butterbur  had  arrived  with  candles,  and  behind  him  was  Nob 
with  cans  of  hot  water.
Come  merry  dol!
I  shan’t  often  be  visiting  the  Shire  openly  again.
On  the  far  side  was  a  faint  path  leading  up  on 
to  the  floor  of  the  Forest,  a  hundred  yards  and  more  beyond 
the  Hedge;  but  it  vanished  as  soon  as  it  brought  them  under 
the  trees.
Far  away  up 
on  the  hill  they  could  hear  the  sound  of  singing  falling  from 
on  high  like  soft  rain  upon  leaves.
It  is  the 
last  chapter  in  the  Tale  of  the  Ring,  so  far  as  it  has  yet  gone.
‘And 
why  should  he  want  such  slaves?’ 

‘To  tell  you  the  truth,’  replied  Gandalf,  ‘I  believe  that 
hitherto  -  hitherto ,  mark  you  -  he  has  entirely  overlooked 
the  existence  of  hobbits.
These 
things  Gandalf  must  know.
They  came 
a  few  timid  steps  further  into  the  room,  and  began  to  bow 
low,  feeling  strangely  surprised  and  awkward,  like  folk  that, 
knocking  at  a  cottage  door  to  beg  for  a  drink  of  water,  have 
been  answered  by  a  fair  young  elf-queen  clad  in  living 
flowers.
Then  they  rested  and  slept  without  fear 
upon  the  ground;  for  their  guides  would  not  permit  them  to 
unbind  their  eyes,  and  they  could  not  climb.
He 
straddled  one  of  these,  and  paddled  his  hot  feet  in  the  cool 
brown  water;  and  there  he  too  suddenly  fell  asleep  with  his 
back  against  the  tree.
‘Frodo  Baggins  at  your  service  and  your  family’s,’  said 
Frodo  correctly,  rising  in  surprise  and  scattering  his  cushions.
‘And  useful.
They  had  to  work  harder  in  Bree,  but 
Bob  treated  them  well;  so  on  the  whole  they  were  lucky:  they 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK  235 

missed  a  dark  and  dangerous  journey.
THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL 


473 


I  am  not  a  counsellor.
Westward  he  looked 
and  saw  the  broad  pastures  of  Rohan;  and  Orthanc,  the 
pinnacle  of  Isengard,  like  a  black  spike.
It  is  far  from  the  mountains.’ 

‘We  will  not  start  until  it  is  fully  dark,’  said  Aragorn.
The  Bree-folk  called  them  Rangers,  and  knew  nothing  of 
their  origin.
They  were  beginning  to  look  out  for  a  place  off  the  Road, 
where  they  could  camp  for  the  night,  when  they  heard  a 
sound  that  brought  sudden  fear  back  into  their  hearts:  the 
noise  of  hoofs  behind  them.
And 
look!
Though  he  had  a  suitable  chair, 
and  was  raised  upon  several  cushions,  he  felt  very  small,  and 
rather  out  of  place;  but  that  feeling  quickly  passed.
Its  fingered  end  had 
hold  of  Frodo’s  foot,  and  was  dragging  him  into  the  water.
‘But  most  of 
all  I  should  like  to  go  walking  today  and  explore  the  valley.
‘Do  be  careful 
of  that  ring,  Frodo!
It  had  walls  of  brick  at 
the  sides,  which  rose  steadily,  until  suddenly  they  arched  over 
and  formed  a  tunnel  that  dived  deep  under  the  Hedge  and 
came  out  in  the  hollow  on  the  other  side.
When  they  forced 
their  way  at  last  into  more  open  ground,  they  were  hot  and 
tired  and  very  scratched,  and  they  were  also  no  longer  certain 
of  the  direction  in  which  they  were  going.
Well,  if  that  isn’t  queerer  than  ever!’  he  exclaimed.
We  ought  to  have  squeezed  it,  yes  precious.
It  slid  away  at  once  into  the  dark 
without  a  sound.
Bilbo  knew 
more:  many’s  the  talk  I  had  with  him  when  I  was  a  little  lad.’ 

‘Oh,  they’re  both  cracked,’  said  Ted.
They  ran  swifter.
Bill,  seeming  to  understand  well  what  was  going  on,  nuzzled 
up  to  him,  putting  his  nose  to  Sam’s  ear.
I  have  known 
strong  warriors  of  the  Big  People  who  would  quickly  have 
been  overcome  by  that  splinter,  which  you  bore  for  seventeen 
days.’ 

‘What  would  they  have  done  to  me?’  asked  Frodo.
‘The  birds  again!’  said  Aragorn,  pointing  down.
through  him  the  Enemy  has  learned  that  the 
One  has  been  found  again.
Let  messages  be  sent  to  Orthanc.” 

‘  “I  will  do  that,”  he  said,  and  rode  off  as  if  the  Nine  were 
after  him.
Nai  hiruvalye  Valimar.
Well,  if  it  isn’t  Master 
Pippin  -  Mr.
He  tarried  there  from  errantry, 
and  melodies  they  taught  to  him, 
and  sages  old  him  marvels  told, 
and  harps  of  gold  they  brought  to  him.
What  fun  to  be  off 
again,  off  on  the  Road  with  dwarves!
Yet 
surely,  Gimli  son  of  Gloin,  you  desire  something  that  I  could 
give?
Farmer  Maggot  drew  in  his  ponies  and  the  waggon 
creaked  to  a  halt.
‘You  take  after  Bilbo,’  said  Gandalf.
But  Smeagol  had  been  watching  him  from 
behind  a  tree,  and  as  Deagol  gloated  over  the  ring,  Smeagol 
came  softly  up  behind.
The  obvious  thing  to  do,  of  course,  if  one  could.
Slowly  his  hands  relaxed,  and 
he  began  to  tremble.
They  leapt  up  refreshed.
Now  they  bid  me  climb  up  with  Frodo;  for  they 
seem  to  have  had  some  tidings  of  him  and  of  our  journey.
As  if  it  were  a  breath  that  came  in  through 
unseen  doors  out  of  deep  places,  dread  came  over  him.
But  as  they  drew  near  to  the  further  gate,  Frodo 
saw  a  dark  ill-kept  house  behind  a  thick  hedge:  the  last  house 
in  the  village.
Some  other  fear  was  on  him  greater  than  mine.
250 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘I  know  only  the  little  that  Gandalf  has  told  me,’  said  Frodo 
slowly.
‘A  song!’ 
shouted  one  of  the  hobbits.
‘I  don’t  like  this  at  all,’  panted  Sam  just  behind.
The  night  was  railing  against  the  morning  of  which  it  was 
bereaved,  and  the  cold  was  cursing  the  warmth  for  which  it 
hungered.
They  had  no  fuel  nor  any  means  of  malting  torches;  in  the 
desperate  scramble  at  the  doors  many  things  had  been  left 
behind.
Even  if  you  set  out  from  this  spot,  you  will  hardly 
reach  him  before  the  Nine  discover  the  land  that  they  seek.
The 
horses  of  the  Nine  cannot  vie  with  him;  tireless,  swift  as  the 
flowing  wind.
Their  ponies  were  standing  crowded  together 
with  their  heads  down.
Then 
a  great,  flat,  toeless  foot  was  forced  through  below.
‘I  should  not  sing  any  more  at  present.
The  flies  began  to  torment 
them,  and  the  air  was  full  of  clouds  of  tiny  midges  that  crept 
up  their  sleeves  and  breeches  and  into  their  hair.
He  wished  he  could  cover 
the  hole,  if  only  with  a  blanket,  but  he  dared  not  move  or  go 
near  it,  even  though  Gandalf  seemed  to  be  asleep.
‘I  was  afraid  for  you,  Frodo,’  he  said,  coming  forward.
In  any 
case  we  did  not  lull  him:  he  is  very  old  and  very  wretched.
On  the  western  flank  of  Weathertop  they  found  a  sheltered 
hollow,  at  the  bottom  of  which  there  was  a  bowl-shaped  dell 
with  grassy  sides.
Gilthoniel!
‘It’s  very  strange,’ 
he  murmured.
His 
hands  were  cold  and  his  brow  damp.
‘Over  the  bridge!’  cried  Gandalf,  recalling  his  strength.
‘Have 
you  seen  Frodo?’ 

Boromir  hesitated  for  a  second.
I’ve  never  been  so  far  myself;  they’re  queer  folks 
in  Buckland.
I  rode  away  at  dawn; 


336 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


and  I  came  at  long  last  to  the  dwelling  of  Saruman.
‘My  cousin  Hal  for  one.
‘Ours  at  last!’  said  Lobelia,  as  she  stepped  inside.
He  thought  no  longer  of 
his  sword.
They  are  not  idle.
But  it  is  said:  Do  not  meddle  in  the  affairs  of  Wizards ,  for 
they  are  subtle  and  quick  to  anger.
For  the  Shadow  grows  and  draws  nearer.
‘I  can’t  keep  it  dark  any 
longer.
232  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

In  the  early  night  Frodo  woke  from  deep  sleep,  suddenly, 
as  if  some  sound  or  presence  had  disturbed  him.
It  might 
have  been  mine.
There  was  a  blow,  soft  but  heavy,  and  the  door  shuddered.
They  went  forward  steadily,  but  they  soon  saw  that  the 
Road  was  further  away  than  they  had  imagined.
All  his 
mind  was  given  to  listening  and  nothing  else  for  two  slow 
hours;  but  he  heard  no  sound,  not  even  the  imagined  echo 
of  a  footfall.
‘He’s 
been  a  bit  queer  lately,  to  my  mind.
For  even  the  Wise 
might  fear  to  withstand  the  Nine,  when  they  are  gathered 
together  under  their  fell  chieftain.
the  pillars  seemed  to  tremble  and  the  flames  to  quiver.
And  I  don’t  remember  any  moon,  either 
new  or  old,  in  Caras  Galadhon:  only  stars  by  night  and  sun 
by  day.’ 

Legolas  stirred  in  his  boat.
He  was  an  honest  man, 
and  well-off  as  things  were  reckoned  in  Bree;  but  thirty  silver 
pennies  was  a  sore  blow  to  him,  and  being  cheated  by  Bill 
Ferny  made  it  harder  to  bear.
She  snorted,  and  showed  plainly  that  she 
thought  the  Gamgees  capable  of  plundering  the  hole  during 
the  night.
There  is  mischief  about.
As  Beren  looked  into  her  eyes 
Within  the  shadows  of  her  hair, 

The  trembling  starlight  of  the  skies 
He  saw  there  mirrored  shimmering.
‘I  have  written  Gandalf  is  here  in  signs  that  all  can 
read  from  Rivendell  to  the  mouths  of  Anduin.’ 

But  the  Company  cared  no  longer  for  watchers  or  un¬ 
friendly  eyes.
Everything  was  still,  and  far-away  noises 
seemed  near  and  clear:  fowls  chattering  in  a  yard,  someone 
closing  a  door  of  a  distant  house.
It 
was  crowned  with  a  knot  of  old  and  twisted  trees,  about 
which  lay  a  broken  circle  of  boulder-stones.
Perhaps  you  are  thinking  it  won’t  be  too  easy  to  get  to  the 
Ferry  without  being  caught?’ 

‘I  was  thinking  so,’  said  Frodo.
‘Mr.
Strider 
can  take  you  by  paths  that  are  seldom  trodden.
Three  small 
grey  boats  had  been  made  ready  for  the  travellers,  and  in 
these  the  Elves  stowed  their  goods.
He 
muttered  that  he  was  going  to  get  his  own  back.
Bilbo  chose  his  favourite  stick 
from  the  stand;  then  he  whistled.
But 
may  we  not  hear  the  proofs?
‘We’ll  need  it.
‘News  of  you,  of  course,’  answered  Strider.
Tell  me  all  about  the  Shire!’ 

Frodo  hid  the  Ring  away,  and  the  shadow  passed  leaving 
hardly  a  shred  of  memory.
And  it  seems  that  Hobbits  fade  very  reluctantly.
Merry  threw 
himself  alongside.
‘Laugh 
and  be  merry!
And  not  without  reason,  for  the  horses  of  the  Riddermark 
come  from  the  fields  of  the  North,  far  from  the  Shadow,  and 
their  race,  as  that  of  their  masters,  is  descended  from  the  free 
days  of  old.’ 

‘True  indeed!’  said  Gandalf.
He 
too  was  gazing  eastward  along  the  road,  as  if  he  had  never 
seen  it  before.
‘And  how  much  did  Bilbo  know?’ 

‘Bilbo  knew  no  more  than  he  told  you,  I  am  sure,’  said 
Gandalf.
We’ll  be  waiting  for  you!
You  must  share  this  secret  with  me.
‘But  what  can  we  do?’  cried  Pippin  miserably.
This  is  only  a  small  selection  of  the  assembled  presents.
For  Isildur  was  marching  north  along  the  east 
banks  of  the  River,  and  near  the  Gladden  Fields  he  was 
waylaid  by  the  Ores  of  the  Mountains,  and  almost  all  his  folk 
were  slain.
Alas  for  Gimli  son  of  Gloin!’ 

‘Nay!’  said  Legolas.
After  a  few  miles 
they  came  out  on  the  top  of  a  high  bank  above  the  Road.
he  said,  and  then 
he  drew  a  breath,  and  returning  out  of  his  thought  he  looked 
at  Frodo  and  smiled.
The  Captain  then  sent  some  eastward  straight 
across  country,  and  he  himself  with  the  rest  rode  along  the 
Road  in  great  wrath.
They  were 


510  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

far  less  heavy  than  any  had  expected.
‘Because 
we  cannot  use  it,  and  what  is  done  with  it  turns  to  evil.’ 

Boromir  got  up  and  walked  about  impatiently.
He  was 
weary,  sweating  and  yet  chilled.
The  vale  of  Entwash  is  flat  and  fenny, 
and  fog  is  a  deadly  peril  there  for  those  on  foot  and  laden.
‘Here  we  will  rest  tonight,’  said  Aragorn.
Behind  Frodo 
went  Sam,  and  after  him  Legolas,  and  the  young  hobbits, 
and  Boromir.
As  far  as  I  understand  what  you  have  said,  I  suppose  I 
must  keep  the  Ring  and  guard  it,  at  least  for  the  present, 
whatever  it  may  do  to  me.’ 

‘Whatever  it  may  do,  it  will  be  slow,  slow  to  evil,  if  you 
keep  it  with  that  purpose,’  said  Gandalf.
Aragorn  and  Gandalf  walked  together  or  sat  speaking  of 
their  road  and  the  perils  they  would  meet;  and  they  pondered 
the  storied  and  figured  maps  and  books  of  lore  that  were  in 
the  house  of  Elrond.
That 
is  the  doom  that  we  must  deem.
I  was  not  asleep,  Master  Elrond.
The  begin¬ 
nings  lie  back  in  the  Black  Years,  which  only  the  lore-masters 
now  remember.
We  can 
usually  guess  what  you  are  thinking.
Frodo  welcomed  his  old  friend  with  surprise  and  great 
delight.
‘A  plain  road,  though  it  led  through  a  hedge  of  swords,’ 
said  Boromir.
‘For 
though  I  do  not  ask  for  aid,  we  need  it.
Then  in  desperation 
he  began  a  ridiculous  song  that  Bilbo  had  been  rather  fond 
of  (and  indeed  rather  proud  of,  for  he  had  made  up  the  words 
himself).
No  tree  grew  there, 
only  rough  grass  and  many  tall  plants:  stalky  and  faded  hem¬ 
locks  and  wood-parsley,  fire-weed  seeding  into  fluffy  ashes, 
and  rampant  nettles  and  thistles.
Suddenly  a  wide  yellow  beam 
flowed  out  brightly  from  a  door  that  was  opened.
So  cheer  up, 
Frodo!
Thy  nuncle  was  dead  as  a  lump  o’  lead, 

Afore  I  found  his  shinbone.
‘But  it  will  be  hard  to  find  the 
path  unless  the  fog  lifts  a  little  later  on.
In  his  aged  face  under  great  snowy  brows  his  dark 
eyes  were  set  like  coals  that  could  leap  suddenly  into  fire.
Thursday,  his  birthday 
morning,  dawned  as  fair  and  clear  as  it  had  long  ago  for 
Bilbo’s  great  party.
‘I  think,  Bilbo,’  he  said  quietly,  ‘I  should 
leave  it  behind.
Do  you  mean  to  say  that  you,  and  the  Elves,  have  let 
him  live  on  after  all  those  horrible  deeds?
‘Indeed  things  have  changed!’  said  Gandalf.
Then  the  enchantment  became  more 
and  more  dreamlike,  until  he  felt  that  an  endless  river  of 
swelling  gold  and  silver  was  flowing  over  him,  too  multitu¬ 
dinous  for  its  pattern  to  be  comprehended;  it  became  part  of 
the  throbbing  air  about  him,  and  it  drenched  and  drowned 
him.
For  nothing  passes  door  and  window  here 
save  moonlight  and  starlight  and  the  wind  off  the  hill-top.
But  is  it  not  really  your  good 
sense  that  revolts?’ 

‘No,  I  am  afraid,’  said  Frodo.
‘Yes,  probably,’  said  Frodo,  not  liking  the  reminder.
Suddenly  he  clapped  his  hand  to  his  head.
Then  there  was 
silence,  and  no  word  has  ever  come  from  Moria  since.
It  climbed  trees 
to  find  nests;  it  crept  into  holes  to  find  the  young;  it  slipped 
through  windows  to  find  cradles.
I  must  go 
home!’ 

‘You  cannot  go  home  alone,’  said  the  Lady.
456 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


To  the  left  stood  a  great  mound,  covered  with  a  sward  of 
grass  as  green  as  Springtime  in  the  Elder  Days.
Nob’ll  say  no  word.
There  they  halted  and 
adjusted  the  straps  of  their  packs.
But  no  boat  can  live  in  Sarn  Gebir,  be 
it  night  or  day.’ 

‘Back,  back!’  cried  Aragorn.
But  I  will  be  content,  if  only  Legolas 
here  shares  my  blindness.’ 


LOTHLORIEN  453 

‘I  am  an  Elf  and  a  kinsman  here,’  said  Legolas,  becoming 
angry  in  his  turn.
‘You  will  hear 
today  all  that  you  need  in  order  to  understand  the  purposes 
of  the  Enemy.
The  bread  tastes  almost  as 
good  as  it  did  last  night.
‘I  will  send  my  people 
to  you  in  the  morning  to  help  you  make  ready  for  the  journey.
Pass  it  round!’ 

As  soon  as  Frodo  had  swallowed  a  little  of  the  warm  and 
fragrant  liquor  he  felt  a  new  strength  of  heart,  and  the 
heavy  drowsiness  left  his  limbs.
He  always  used  to  joke  about  serious  things.
Birds  were 
singing,  and  a  wholesome  peace  lay  on  the  land.
‘That  is  the  worst  news  that  has 
come  to  Bree  in  my  time.’ 

‘It  is,’  said  Frodo.
‘It  is  said  that  the  skill  of  the  Dwarves  is  in  their  hands  rather 
than  in  their  tongues,’  she  said;  ‘yet  that  is  not  true  of  Gimli.
‘Though  that  flash  was  surprising: 
it  quite  startled  me,  let  alone  the  others.
Lonely  men  are  we,  Rangers  of  the  wild,  hunters 
-  but  hunters  ever  of  the  servants  of  the  Enemy;  for  they  are 
found  in  many  places,  not  in  Mordor  only.
It  was  rough  and  broken,  fading  to  a  winding  track  between 
heather  and  whin  that  thrust  amid  the  cracking  stones.
‘Is  then  the  doom  of  Minas  Tirith 
come  at  last?
In 
Rivendell  there  was  memory  of  ancient  things;  in  Lorien  the 


LOTHLORIEN 


455 


ancient  things  still  lived  on  in  the  waking  world.
There  were  armies  of 
flies  of  all  kinds  buzzing  round  their  ears,  and  the  afternoon 
sun  was  burning  on  their  backs.
A  ship  then  new  they  built  for  him 
of  mithril  and  of  elven-glass 
with  shining  prow;  no  shaven  oar 
nor  sail  she  bore  on  silver  mast: 
the  Silmaril  as  lantern  light 
and  banner  bright  with  living  flame 
to  gleam  thereon  by  Elbereth 
herself  was  set,  who  thither  came 
and  wings  immortal  made  for  him, 
and  laid  on  him  undying  doom, 
to  sail  the  shoreless  skies  and  come 
behind  the  Sun  and  light  of  Moon.
I  was  so 
startled  that  I  hardly  had  the  wits  to  hide  myself  in  a  more 
ordinary  fashion;  but  I  got  through  the  hedge  and  walked 
along  the  field  inside.
When  they  asked:  Where  is  he  then?’  he  shrugged  his 
shoulders.
Out  east  my  knowledge  fails.
But  I  must  go  at  once.
I  let  the  matter 
rest,  watching  and  waiting  only,  as  we  have  too  often  done.
‘It  is  now  many  years  ago,’  said  Gloin,  ‘that  a  shadow  of 
disquiet  fell  upon  our  people.
That  has  been  the 
task  of  my  kindred,  while  the  years  have  lengthened  and  the 
grass  has  grown.
Under  their 
shadow  Elessar,  the  Elfstone  son  of  Arathorn  of  the  House 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


513 


of  Valandil  Isildur’s  son,  heir  of  Elendil,  has  naught  to  dread!’ 

Then  the  light  of  his  eyes  faded,  and  he  spoke  to  himself: 
‘Would  that  Gandalf  were  here!
And  why  not?
THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL  469 

Though  that  doesn’t  do  them  justice  by  a  long  road.’ 

‘No,  I’ll  leave  that  to  you,  Sam.
Flis 
enemy  halted  again,  facing  him,  and  the  shadow  about  it 
reached  out  like  two  vast  wings.
After  lunch,  the  Sackville-Bagginses,  Lobelia  and  her 
sandy-haired  son,  Lotho,  turned  up,  much  to  Frodo’s  annoy¬ 
ance.
And  I’m  mortal  afraid  of 
what  Gandalf  will  say,  if  harm  comes  of  it.
‘We  cannot  go  any  further,’  said  Merry  to  Strider.
The  silver  lines  faded,  but 
the  blank  grey  stone  did  not  stir.
Before  them 
lay  a  long  lawn  of  shining  grass,  studded  with  golden  elanor 
that  glinted  in  the  sun.
He  stood  listening.
Come  on!
‘  “For  the  present,”  said  he,  and  rode  into  the  darkness.
Even  Gollum 
was  not  wholly  ruined.
Great  power  and 
majesty  they  still  wore,  the  silent  wardens  of  a  long-vanished 
kingdom.
After  that  the  Company  kept  a  sharp  look-out, 
but  they  saw  no  more  of  Gollum  while  the  voyage  lasted.
You  can  do  as  you 
like  about  my  reward:  take  me  as  a  guide  or  not.
Three  months  back  he  walked 
right  into  my  room  without  a  knock.
It  had  no  walls, 
not  even  a  rail;  only  on  one  side  was  there  a  light  plaited 
screen,  which  could  be  moved  and  fixed  in  different  places 
according  to  the  wind.
It  flows  down  out  of  the  Ettenmoors, 
the  troll-fells  north  of  Rivendell,  and  joins  the  Loudwater 


262 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


away  in  the  South.
He  resisted  the  temptation  firmly, 
and  clasped  the  Ring  in  his  hand,  as  if  to  keep  a  hold  on  it 
and  prevent  it  from  escaping  or  doing  any  mischief.
The  Big  Folk  and  the  Little  Folk  (as  they  called  one  another) 
were  on  friendly  terms,  minding  their  own  affairs  in  their 
own  ways,  but  both  rightly  regarding  themselves  as  necessary 
parts  of  the  Bree-folk.
Already 
war  is  gathering  on  his  eastern  borders.
Our  days  have 
darkened,  and  we  have  dwindled;  but  ever  the  Sword  has 
passed  to  a  new  keeper.
Pippin  and  Sam  had  remained  flat  in  the  grass,  and  had 
seen  nothing;  so  Frodo  described  the  rider  and  his  strange 
behaviour.
Warning  against  what?’  said  Boromir  sharply.
Haldir  and  his  companion 
bent  their  bows.
I  hope  he  hasn’t  done  no  harm, 
sir,  nor  me.’ 

‘The  Gaffer  can’t  be  blamed  anyway,’  said  Frodo.
Tom  sprang  away,  and  breaking  off 
a  hanging  branch  smote  the  side  of  the  willow  with  it.
We  must  talk  a  while  more,  and  think  about  the  morning.
‘You  have  had  some  very  strange  adventures,  I  hear,’  said 
Gloin.
Come  merry  dol!
The  Balrog  reached  the  bridge.
‘He  has  more  snow  yet  to  fling  at  us,  if 
we  go  on.
‘Begging  your  pardon,  sir!
I  never  mean  to.
fear!
He  spoke  this  last  word  so  loudly  and 
suddenly  that  everyone  sat  up  who  still  could.
Butterbur,  pro¬ 
ducing  a  letter  from  his  pocket,  and  reading  out  the 
address  slowly  and  proudly  (he  valued  his  reputation  as  a 
lettered  man) : 


STRIDER 


219 


Mr.
‘And  there  is  one  among  them 
that  might  have  been  foaled  in  the  morning  of  the  world.
He  could  only  suppose  that  he 
had  been  handling  it  in  his  pocket  while  he  sang,  and  that 
somehow  it  had  slipped  on  when  he  stuck  out  his  hand  with 
a  jerk  to  save  his  fall.
Frodo  sat  up  in  alarm  and  saw  that  it  was  a  grey-hooded  Elf.
‘Yet  that  hour,  maybe,  is  not  now  far  away.
I  was  going  to  walk  in  any  case.
On  some  errand  of  mischief.
In  the  morning  he  woke  to  find  that  the  rain  had  stopped.
I’d  dearly  love  to  see  some  Elf-magic,  Mr.
Her  hair  was  long,  her  limbs  were  white, 
And  fair  she  was  and  free; 

And  in  the  wind  she  went  as  light 
As  leaf  of  linden-tree.
We  are  tired,  but  we  shall  rest  better  when  we  are 
outside,’  he  said.
People  would 
see  if  he  would  stand  being  kicked,  and  driven  into  a  hole 
and  then  robbed.
Far  into 
the  dark  quiet  hours  they  floated  on,  guiding  their  boats  under 
the  overhanging  shadows  of  the  western  woods.
Ho!
Mr.
I  think  Gollum 
tried  to.
It  is  long  since  I  heard 
them,  and  I  thought  deeply  before  I  could  recall  them  to  my 
mind.’ 

‘What  does  the  writing  say?’  asked  Frodo,  who  was  trying 
to  decipher  the  inscription  on  the  arch.
Hallo!
Frodo,’  said  Sam  anxiously.
It 
will  not  help  us  to  keep  so  secret  that  we  are  frozen  to  death.
And  now  I  think  I’ll  be  getting  to  bed.
‘At 
the  very  latest  I  shall  come  back  for  the  farewell  party.
There 
the  River  flows  in  stony  vales  amid  high  moors,  until  at  last 
after  many  leagues  it  comes  to  the  tall  island  of  the  Tindrock, 
that  we  call  Tol  Brandir.
‘There  are  trolls!’  Pippin  panted.
There 
was  a  fold  or  channel  where  the  mist  was  broken  into  many 
plumes  and  billows:  the  valley  of  the  Withywindle.
One  day  he  refused  to  come  down,  and  the 
guards  had  no  mind  to  climb  after  him:  he  had  learned  the 
trick  of  clinging  to  boughs  with  his  feet  as  well  as  with  his 
hands;  so  they  sat  by  the  tree  far  into  the  night.
In  his  left 
hand  he  held  up  his  glimmering  staff,  the  light  of  which  just 
showed  the  ground  before  his  feet;  in  his  right  he  held  his 
sword  Glamdring.
But  Strider  seemed  to  be  held  in 
awe  by  most  of  the  Bree-landers,  and  those  that  he  stared  at 
shut  their  mouths  and  drew  away.
io6 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Be  careful,  friends!’  cried  Gildor  laughing.
THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


383 


‘That  cannot  be  helped  now,’  said  Gandalf.
Too  surprised  and  too  relieved  to  talk,  the  hobbits  followed 
after  him  as  fast  as  they  could.
But  it  seemed  to  me 
that  one  or  two  had  ridden  towards  Bree;  and  that  way  I  went, 
for  I  thought  of  words  that  might  be  said  to  the  innkeeper.
Baggins,  with  her  compliments.’  He  handed  it  down  and 
moved  off,  followed  by  a  chorus  of  thanks  and  good-nights.
The  Withywindle  valley  is  said  to  be  the  queerest  part  of  the 
whole  wood  -  the  centre  from  which  all  the  queerness  comes, 
as  it  were.’ 

The  others  looked  in  the  direction  that  Merry  pointed  out, 
but  they  could  see  little  but  mists  over  the  damp  and  deep-cut 
valley;  and  beyond  it  the  southern  half  of  the  Forest  faded 
from  view.
The  silver  corslet  shimmered  before  his 
eyes  like  the  light  upon  a  rippling  sea.
Don’t  let  him  go!’  cried  Pippin.
that  is  “fire”.
I’ve  just  been  having  a  few  words  with 
Strider  in  the  corner.’ 

He  came  forward  into  the  firelight;  but  most  of  the  com¬ 
pany  backed  away,  even  more  perturbed  than  before.
Distant  but 
deep  there  came  up  on  the  wind  a  roaring  sound  like  the  roll 
of  thunder  heard  far  away.
I  did  not  know  what  to  do  without  you.’ 

‘I  was  delayed,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘and  that  nearly  proved  our 
ruin.
He  was  not  daunted 
by  the  distance,  I  am  sure.
Suddenly  they 
came  out  of  the  trees  and  found  themselves  in  a  wide  circular 
space.
He  wondered  if  he  put  on  the  Ring,  whether  the 
Barrow-wight  would  miss  him,  and  he  might  find  some  way 
out.
They  shone  piercingly  bright,  and  yet  remote,  as  if  out  of  a 
great  depth.
Sam  looked  at  it  and  puckered  his  brows.
See  now!
Terror  and  grief  shook  him,  seeing  in  his  thought 
the  mad  fierce  face  of  Boromir,  and  his  burning  eyes.
Before  long  the  wood  came  to  a  sudden  end.
Take  off  your  golden  ring!
Ho!
To 
his  right  there  loomed  against  the  westward  stars  a  dark  black 
shape.
And  if  that  was  not  enough,  he  was  given  a  whole  list  of 
names,  beginning  with  ‘Old  Barliman  here’,  to  whom  he 
could  go  for  further  information.
The  road  now  turned  south  and  went  quickly  downwards, 
running  out  from  between  the  arms  of  the  dale.
The  opening  word  was 
inscribed  on  the  archway  all  the  time!
Then  he  let  go  of  his  line,  for  he  thought 
he  saw  something  shining  in  the  river-bed;  and  holding  his 
breath  he  grabbed  at  it.
They 
could  not  catch  the  words,  but  evidently  Merry  was  aroused.
Those  were  happier 
days,  when  there  was  still  close  friendship  at  times  between 
folk  of  different  race,  even  between  Dwarves  and  Elves.’ 

‘It  was  not  the  fault  of  the  Dwarves  that  the  friendship 
waned,’  said  Gimli.
They  had  a  choice  between  going  back  or 
climbing  over  it.
‘Are  these  magic  cloaks?’  asked  Pippin,  looking  at  them 
with  wonder.
The  eaves  of  the  Forest  behind 
were  clipped,  and  trim  as  a  hedge.
‘As  for  me,’  said  Boromir,  ‘my  way  home  lies  onward  and 
not  back.’ 

‘That  is  true,’  said  Celeborn,  ‘but  is  all  this  Company  going 
with  you  to  Minas  Tirith?’ 

‘We  have  not  decided  our  course,’  said  Aragorn.
He  had  enjoyed  the  joke, 
of  course,  even  though  he  had  been  in  the  know.
He  paused  as  if  counting  those  that 
were  present,  and  then  sat  down  aloof,  with  his  eyes  on  the 
ground.
Thus  the  Enemy  knows 
now  that  the  One  is  found,  that  it  was  long  in  the  Shire;  and 
since  his  servants  have  pursued  it  almost  to  our  door,  he  soon 


332 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


will  know,  already  he  may  know,  even  as  I  speak,  that  we 
have  it  here.’ 

All  sat  silent  for  a  while,  until  at  length  Boromir  spoke.
Are  you  going  to  sleep  on  your  legs?
‘Of  course,  I  have  sometimes  thought  of  going  away,  but 
I  imagined  that  as  a  kind  of  holiday,  a  series  of  adventures 
like  Bilbo’s  or  better,  ending  in  peace.
According 
to  their  own  tales  they  were  the  original  inhabitants  and  were 
the  descendants  of  the  first  Men  that  ever  wandered  into  the 
West  of  the  middle-world.
They  went  abreast  and  in  step,  to  keep  up 
their  spirits.
‘There  are  some,  even  in  these  parts,  as 
know  the  Fair  Folk  and  get  news  of  them,’  he  said.
I  think  you  should  now 
go  at  once,  without  delay;  and  if  Gandalf  does  not  come 
before  you  set  out,  then  I  also  advise  this:  do  not  go  alone.
Which  way  shall  we  take?
Frodo  stripped  the  blankets  from  Pippin  and  rolled  him 
over,  and  then  walked  off  to  the  edge  of  the  wood.
‘I  am  starting  tomorrow,  as  soon  as  it 
is  light.
THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


337 


What  brings  you  now  from  your  lurking-place  in  the  Shire?” 

‘  “The  Nine  have  come  forth  again,”  I  answered.
At  first  he  put  it  on  the 
mantelpiece,  but  suddenly  he  removed  it  and  stuck  it  in  his 
pocket.
The  light  of  sun  and  star  and  moon 
In  shining  lamps  of  crystal  hewn 
Undimmed  by  cloud  or  shade  of  night 
There  shone  for  ever  fair  and  bright.
Frodo  made  no  answer;  his 
mind  was  confused  with  doubt  and  fear.
Frodo  felt 


402  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

something  seize  him  by  the  ankle,  and  he  fell  with  a  cry.
‘Their  horses  must  have  perished, 
and  without  them  they  are  crippled.
So  far  there  had  been  no  sign  or  sound  of  pursuit  that  the 
hobbits  could  see  or  hear;  but  often  Glorfindel  would  halt 
and  listen  for  a  moment,  if  they  lagged  behind,  and  a  look  of 
anxiety  clouded  his  face.
Frodo’s 
feet  felt  like  lead.
There  was  a  faint  stir  in  the  leaves,  and  a  cock  crowed  far 
away.
If  you 
go  on  to  The  Pony ,  you’ll  find  you’re  not  the  only  guests.’ 

He  wished  them  good  night,  and  they  said  no  more;  but 
Frodo  could  see  in  the  lantern-light  that  the  man  was  still 
eyeing  them  curiously.
After  riding  for  about 
an  hour,  slowly  and  without  talking,  they  saw  the  Hedge 
looming  suddenly  ahead.
‘You  never  men¬ 
tioned  Gandalf,  till  this  letter  came  out.
‘Far  worse  than  the  worst 
that  I  imagined  from  your  hints  and  warnings.
There  were  many  miles  yet  to  go  between 
them  and  the  Ford,  and  they  hobbled  forward  at  the  best 
pace  they  could  manage.
We  cannot  dare 
the  Rapids  by  night!
It  could  make  no  further 
use  of  him:  he  was  too  small  and  mean;  and  as  long  as  it 
stayed  with  him  he  would  never  leave  his  deep  pool  again.
‘Yes,  of  course!
From  helm  to  sea  they  saw  him  leap, 

As  arrow  from  the  string, 

And  dive  into  the  water  deep, 

As  mew  upon  the  wing.
Out  of  the  very  ground  at  their  feet  a  shadowy  steam 
arose  and  mingled  with  the  swiftly  falling  dusk.
It  faced  southwards,  and  near  the  bottom  it 
leaned  out  a  little,  so  that  they  hoped  it  would  give  them 
some  protection  from  the  northerly  wind  and  from  the  falling 
stones.
the 
spear  in  my  heart!’  He  clutched  at  his  breast.
That  can’t  be  right.
Come,  Tom  Bombadil,  for  our  need  is  near  us!
The  decision  to  set 
out  eastwards  had  suggested  the  idea  to  him;  for  Buckland 
was  on  the  eastern  borders  of  the  Shire,  and  as  he  had  lived 
there  in  childhood  his  going  back  would  at  least  seem 
credible.
The 
hobbits  felt  refreshed,  as  if  they  had  had  a  night  of  unbroken 
sleep.
We  want  to  go  with  Frodo.’ 

‘That  is  because  you  do  not  understand  and  cannot 
imagine  what  lies  ahead,’  said  Elrond.
Don’t  pinch,  lad!
But  you  can  at  least  tell  us,  Frodo,  whether  you  think 
his  guess  good  or  bad.’ 

‘I  think,’’  answered  Frodo  slowly,  ‘that  it  was  a  good  guess, 
as  far  as  it  goes.
‘Well,  I  see  you  have 
ideas  of  your  own,’  he  said.
No  folk  could 
they  see,  nor  hear  any  feet  upon  the  paths;  but  there  were 
many  voices,  about  them,  and  in  the  air  above.
‘But  what  about  this  Frodo  that  lives  with  him?’  asked  Old 
Noakes  of  Bywater.
In  this  meeting  there  may  be  more  than 
chance;  but  the  purpose  is  not  clear  to  me,  and  I  fear  to  say 
too  much.’ 

‘I  am  deeply  grateful,’  said  Frodo;  ‘but  I  wish  you  would 
tell  me  plainly  what  the  Black  Riders  are.
Smoke  rises  once  more  from 
Orodruin  that  we  call  Mount  Doom.
Chapter  3 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


Later  that  day  the  hobbits  held  a  meeting  of  their  own  in 
Bilbo’s  room.
Barliman  Butterbur  at 
your  service!
‘There  are  no  goblins 
near,  or  my  ears  are  made  of  wood.
they  began  again  louder.
What  is  the  light?’  he  said  to  Strider,  who  had  risen,  and 
was  standing,  gazing  ahead  into  the  night.
And  over  Middle-earth  he  passed 
and  heard  at  last  the  weeping  sore 
of  women  and  of  elven-maids 
in  Elder  Days,  in  years  of  yore.
Though  the  word  was  meant, 
and  we  do  not  doubt  that  under  jest  you  are  making  a  valiant 
offer.
Winter  is 
nearly  gone.
At  that  moment  the  door  opened  and  Gandalf  came 
quickly  in.
And  we  will  come  through.
‘It  is  an  eagle,  a  hunting  eagle.
You  know  little 
of  the  lands  beyond  your  bounds.
‘Sam!
It’s  a  pity  Mr.
‘We  should  not  go  much  slower  on  foot,  not  on  the  roads 
that  I  mean  to  take.
It  was  queer.
Make  you?’  said  the  wizard.
He  needed  all  my  help, 
too.
I  have  often  kept  watch  on  the  borders 
of  the  Shire  in  the  last  few  years,  when  he  was  busy  elsewhere.
The  others  also  revived  and 
found  fresh  hope  and  vigour.
Beside  them 
Sam  stood  yawning  and  blinking  stupidly.
Brandybuck?’ 

‘I  don’t  know,’  said  Frodo  with  sudden  anxiety.
What 
are  we  to  do?’ 

‘Stay  here,  and  do  not  go  to  your  rooms!
But  from  hints  dropped  among 
the  snarls  I  gathered  that  his  padding  feet  had  taken  him  at 
last  to  Esgaroth,  and  even  to  the  streets  of  Dale,  listening 
secretly  and  peering.
They  are 
not  permitted  in  our  land.
He 
walked  along  the  terraces  above  the  loud-flowing  Bruinen 
and  watched  the  pale,  cool  sun  rise  above  the  far  mountains, 
and  shine  down,  slanting  through  the  thin  silver  mist;  the 
dew  upon  the  yellow  leaves  was  glimmering,  and  the  woven 
nets  of  gossamer  twinkled  on  every  bush.
Some  call  it  the  Greyflood  after  that.
He  had  a  tall  tankard  in 
front  of  him,  and  was  smoking  a  long-stemmed  pipe  curiously 
carved.
‘I  am  old,  Gandalf.
Frodo  did  not  even  hear  his  cries.
‘The  Enemy?’  said  Frodo.
‘Let  me  get  my  hands  on 
you!
‘I  don’t  want  to  be 
seen,  but  I  want  to  see  if  it  is  another  Black  Rider.’ 

‘Very  well!’  said  Pippin.
Aragorn  bound  some  soft  pads 
of  cloth  at  his  side.
From  somewhere  behind  the  house 
came  the  sound  of  singing.
If  any  mortals  have 
claim  to  the  Ring,  it  is  the  men  of  Numenor,  and  not 
Halflings.
‘Myself,  four  hobbits;  and  two  men, 
one  of  whom,  Aragorn,  is  an  Elf-friend  of  the  folk  of 
Westernesse.’ 

‘The  name  of  Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn  is  known  in  Lorien,’ 
said  Haldir,  ‘and  he  has  the  favour  of  the  Lady.
But  the  Great  Rings,  the  Rings  of 
Power,  they  were  perilous.
Bill  Ferny’s  poor  old  pony  was  developing  an 
unexpected  talent  for  picking  out  a  path,  and  for  sparing  its 
rider  as  many  jolts  as  possible.
‘If  you  go  for¬ 
ward,  peril  will  grow  with  every  mile,  even  if  you  find  a  path.’ 

‘Peril  lies  ahead  on  every  southward  road,’  answered 
Aragorn.
And  now  what  about  you,  Frodo?
Sam,  with  a  cry, 
hacked  at  the  spear-shaft,  and  it  broke.
Elrond  went  forward  and  stood  beside  the  silent  figure.
‘Will  you  be  wanting  anything  to  drink,  masters?’  he  asked.
For  one  thing,  there  was  a  lot  to  do  up  in  the 
Bag  End  garden,  and  he  would  have  a  busy  day  tomorrow, 
if  the  weather  cleared.
Even  as  Aragorn 
and  Boromir  came  flying  back,  the  rest  of  the  bridge  cracked 
and  fell.
One  was  stooping, 
and  the  other  two  stood  staring  at  him.
‘But  I’m  beginning  to  think  it’s  time  we  got  a  sight  of  that 
Fiery  Mountain,  and  saw  the  end  of  the  Road,  so  to  speak.
The  others  no  doubt  will  make  shift  to  tread  the  path 
behind  us.
Frodo  did  not  want 
to  have  any  more  to  do  with  the  party.
The  white  bollards  near  the 
water’s  edge  glimmered  in  the  light  of  two  lamps  on  high 
posts.
We  must  obey  his 
last  command.
Is  that  enough?
‘Eldest  first,  or 
quickest  first?
They  listened  to  this  encouraging  sound 
for  a  moment  and  then  got  off  their  ponies.
The  thought  that  he  would  so 
soon  have  to  part  with  his  young  friends  weighed  on  his  heart.
‘We  have  no  choice  but  to  go  on,  or  to 
return  to  Rivendell.’ 

Pippin’s  face  brightened  visibly  at  the  mere  mention  of 
return  to  Rivendell;  Merry  and  Sam  looked  up  hopefully.
‘Maggot  does 
not  know  anything.’ 

‘Old  Maggot  is  a  shrewd  fellow,’  said  Merry.
Suddenly  a  low  voice 
murmured: 


Gil-galad  was  an  Elven-king.
‘A  Ring  of  Power  looks  after  itself,  Frodo.
While  he  was  thinking  of  all  these  things 
and  trying  in  vain  to  bring  his  memory  down  to  his  arriving 
in  Rivendell,  there  was  a  long  silence,  broken  only  by  the  soft 
puffs  of  Gandalf ’s  pipe,  as  he  blew  white  smoke -rings  out  of 
the  window.
It  was  deeply 
buried,  and  it  was  working  inwards.’ 

Frodo  shuddered,  remembering  the  cruel  knife  with 
notched  blade  that  had  vanished  in  Strider’s  hands.
From  the  ruin  of  the  Gladden  Fields,  where  Isildur 
perished,  three  men  only  came  ever  back  over  the  mountains 
after  long  wandering.
Eventually  they  were  shown  into  the  study.
‘Though  at  the 
moment  I  feel  more  like  eating  and  drinking.’ 

‘That  will  soon  be  cured,’  said  Pippin.
At  last  reluctantly  Gandalf  himself  took  a 
hand.
He  felt  far  from  comfortable 
under  the  stare  of  those  keen  eyes.
‘They  are  invisible,  and  their  own  makers  cannot  find 
them  or  open  them,  if  their  secret  is  forgotten.’ 

‘But  this  Door  was  not  made  to  be  a  secret  known  only  to 
Dwarves,’  said  Gandalf,  coming  suddenly  to  life  and  turning 
round.
‘I  came  west 
with  him  in  the  spring.
Then  sooner  or  later  Rivendell  will  be  besieged, 
and  after  a  brief  and  bitter  time  it  will  be  destroyed.
‘Not  much  use  is  it,  Sam?’  said  Strider.
The  others  followed 
his  example,  putting  their  packs  against  the  bank  and  their 
legs  out  into  the  road.
At  last  the  Elves 
turned  aside  from  the  path.
‘You  would  have  made  a 
good  story  of  it,  if  they  hadn’t  kept  on  interrupting.
At  least  we  are  out  of  sight  for 
the  moment,  and  if  we  moved  we  should  be  much  more  likely 
to  be  seen  by  spies.
Unless  it 
could  be  cured.’  Gandalf  sighed.
“It  wouldn’t  say,  no  precious.
‘We  long  have  feared  that  under 
Caradhras  a  terror  slept.
No  voice  or  call  was  heard  again 
across  the  water.
Sam  gave  various  support¬ 
ing  nods  and  exclamations.
‘Now  the  tale  of  Nine  is  filled.
If  I  go  through  the  North-gate  my  departure 
from  Buckland  will  be  known  at  once,  instead  of  being  secret 
for  several  days  at  least,  as  it  might  be.
‘Where’s  Sam?’  Frodo  asked  at  length.
They  spoke  no  more  of  the  small  news  of 
the  Shire  far  away,  nor  of  the  dark  shadows  and  perils  that 
encompassed  them,  but  of  the  fair  things  they  had  seen  in 
the  world  together,  of  the  Elves,  of  the  stars,  of  trees,  and  the 
gentle  fall  of  the  bright  year  in  the  woods.
The  Sword 
shall  be  reforged.
Ever  since 
the  sun  began  to  sink  the  mist  before  his  eyes  had  darkened, 


The  Brandywine  River.
He  held  it  up,  looking  at  Frodo’s  face,  and  Sam’s.
I  do  not  think  that  it  is  our  part  to 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  527 

drive  him  one  way  or  the  other.
I  may  have  started  with  guesses  about  Gollum,  but 
I  am  not  guessing  now.
Its 
whip  whirled  and  hissed.
Many  Elves  and  many 
mighty  Men,  and  many  of  their  friends,  had  perished  in  the 


318  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

war.
Though  Frodo  looked  about  him  on  every  side  he  saw  no 
sign  of  the  great  stones  standing  like  a  gate,  and  before  long 
they  came  to  the  northern  gap  and  rode  swiftly  through,  and 
the  land  fell  away  before  them.
Through  Mirkwood  and  back 
again  it  led  them,  though  they  never  caught  him.
And  suddenly  he  felt  the  Eye.
The  scratches  are  fine,  and  they 
certainly  look  fresh.
I 
could  think  of  nothing  to  do  but  to  try  and  put  a  shutting-spell 
on  the  door.
Sam  eased  the  pack  on  his  shoulders,  and  went  over 
anxiously  in  his  mind  all  the  things  that  he  had  stowed 
in  it,  wondering  if  he  had  forgotten  anything:  his  chief 
treasure,  his  cooking  gear;  and  the  little  box  of  salt  that 
he  always  carried  and  refilled  when  he  could;  a  good  supply 
of  pipe-weed  (but  not  near  enough,  I’ll  warrant);  flint 
and  tinder;  woollen  hose;  linen;  various  small  belongings  of 
his  master’s  that  Frodo  had  forgotten  and  Sam  had  stowed 
to  bring  them  out  in  triumph  when  they  were  called  for.
He  hated  the 
dark,  and  he  hated  light  more:  he  hated  everything,  and  the 
Ring  most  of  all.’ 

‘What  do  you  mean?’  said  Frodo.
Bilbo  next!’  said  Sam.
‘What  a  foul  thing  to  happen!’  cried  Frodo  wildly.
‘We  surely  aren’t  going  to  stay  here  for  the  night,  are  we, 
sir?’  he  exclaimed.
There  are  few  even  in  Rivendell  that  can  ride  openly  against 
the  Nine;  but  such  as  there  were,  Elrond  sent  out  north,  west, 
and  south.
‘For  the  gifts  that  you  have  given  me  I  thank  you,’  he  said, 
‘O  Lady  of  Lorien  of  whom  were  sprung  Celebrian  and 
Arwen  Evenstar.
It  is  many  a  year  since  the  Nine 
walked  abroad.
They  had  words  with  Harry  at  West-gate  on 
Monday.
Very  much  like 
Mr.
A  noise  of  rending  and  crashing  came 
dully  through  the  ponderous  stone.
‘What  is  that,  Legolas?’  he  asked,  pointing  to  the  northern 
sky.
Butterbur  with  a  glance  at  Pippin.
Following 
its  line  eastward  with  their  eyes  they  saw  the  Mountains:  the 
nearer  foothills  were  brown  and  sombre;  behind  them  stood 
taller  shapes  of  grey,  and  behind  those  again  were  high  white 
peaks  glimmering  among  the  clouds.
I  don’t  think  I  ought  even  to  take 
Sam.’  He  looked  at  Sam  Gamgee,  and  discovered  that  Sam 
was  watching  him.
‘Yes,’  said  Strider,  whose  keener  sight  left  him  in  no  doubt.
The 
ancient  East-West  Road  ran  through  the  Shire  to  its  end  at  the 
Grey  Havens,  and  dwarves  had  always  used  it  on  their  way  to 
their  mines  in  the  Blue  Mountains.
There’s  Mr.
‘I  doubt  very  much,’  he  said,  ‘if  your 


276 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


friends  would  be  in  danger  if  you  were  not  with  them!
But  they  do  things  proper  at  Bag  End.
Any  attempt  to  set  off  across  country 
at  once  would  only  make  matters  worse:  half  the  inhabitants 
would  follow  them,  to  see  what  they  were  up  to,  and  to 
prevent  them  from  trespassing.
‘I 
was  sent  from  Rivendell  to  look  for  you.
‘Apples  for 
walking,  and  a  pipe  for  sitting,’  he  said.
Over  it  a  trickling  water  dripped,  through  a  wide 
cleft  that  seemed  to  have  been  carved  out  by  a  fall  that  had 
once  been  strong  and  full.
‘It  is  a  lie  that 
comes  from  the  Enemy.
‘But  you  will  come,  at  least  for  a  while?’  Boromir  persisted.
It  was 
taken  with  torment  from  Thrain  in  the  dungeons  of  Dol 
Guldur.
Many 
birds  were  circling  about  it,  but  no  sign  of  other  living  things 
could  be  seen.
Up,  down,  near  or  far,  here,  there  or  yonder?
As  they  passed  overhead,  in  so  dense  a 
throng  that  their  shadow  followed  them  darkly  over  the 
ground  below,  one  harsh  croak  was  heard.
His  name,  of 
course,  was  Proudfoot,  and  well  merited;  his  feet  were  large, 
exceptionally  furry,  and  both  were  on  the  table.
‘Winter  deepens  behind  us,’  he  said  quietly  to  Aragorn.
Suddenly  Frodo  realized  that  it  reminded  him  of  Gandalf.
His  look  of 
surprise  was  so  comical  that  they  laughed.
Suddenly  he  was  aware  that  two  black  specks  were 
moving  slowly  along  it,  going  westward;  and  looking  again 
he  saw  that  three  others  were  creeping  eastward  to  meet 
them.
We 
have  sat  here  beside  the  road  already  longer  than  was  wise.’ 

The  Company  now  turned  aside  from  the  path,  and  went 
into  the  shadow  of  the  deeper  woods,  westward  along  the 
mountain-stream  away  from  Silverlode.
Then  the  light 
went  out.
He  was  standing  on  a  knoll  and  pointing  to  the  right.
‘When  did  I  first  begin  to  guess?’  he  mused,  searching  back 
in  memory.
Just  let  me  pass  through,  will  you!’ 

The  others  halted  startled;  but  the  cry  fell  as  if  muffled  by 
a  heavy  curtain.
I  turned 
then  east  and  north  and  journeyed  along  the  Greenway;  and 
not  far  from  Bree  I  came  upon  a  traveller  sitting  on  a  bank 
beside  the  road  with  his  grazing  horse  beside  him.
Frodo  paddled  away  from  the  shore,  and  the  River 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  531 

bore  them  swiftly  away,  down  the  western  arm,  and  past  the 
frowning  cliffs  of  Tol  Brandir.
The  morning  is  passing.’ 

‘Which  way  shall  we  go?’  asked  Boromir.
The 
nearest  he  ever  got  was  to  say:  ‘Well,  sir,  if  I  could  grow 
apples  like  that,  I  would  call  myself  a  gardener.
’ 

‘Is  that  where  you  found  him?’  asked  Frodo.
Some 
people  tried  to  do  swaps  and  deals  in  the  hall;  and  others 
tried  to  make  off  with  minor  items  not  addressed  to  them,  or 
with  anything  that  seemed  unwanted  or  unwatched.
The  boats  were  moved  and  steered 
with  short-handled  paddles  that  had  broad  leaf-shaped 
blades.
But  what  have 
horses  to  do  with  it?’ 

‘I’ll  tell  you  later.
He  pictured  black 
horses  standing  all  saddled  in  the  shadows  of  the  inn-yard, 
and  Black  Riders  peering  out  of  dark  upper  windows.
Come,  let  us  go!
The  wizard  swayed  on  the  bridge,  stepped  back  a  pace,  and 
then  again  stood  still.
‘They  are  sailing,  sailing,  sailing  over  the  Sea,  they  are 
going  into  the  West  and  leaving  us,’  said  Sam,  half  chanting 
the  words,  shaking  his  head  sadly  and  solemnly.
fire!
But  per¬ 
haps  you’ll  come  along  inside,  and  we’ll  pass  the  news  more 
comfortable.
Nonetheless  it  needed  the  strength  of  the  two  Men  to  lift  and 
haul  them  over  the  ground  that  the  Company  now  had  to 
cross.
But 
if  they  were  shut,  any  who  knew  the  opening  word  could 
speak  it  and  pass  in.
Of  all  the  legends  that  he  had  heard  in  his 
early  years  such  fragments  of  tales  and  half-remembered 
stories  about  the  Elves  as  the  hobbits  knew,  had  always  moved 
him  most  deeply.
Barliman  Butterbur 
is  the  worthy  keeper.
There  was  little  else  that  I  could  do.
‘My  four-legged  friend;  though  I 
seldom  ride  him,  and  he  wanders  often  far,  free  upon  the 
hillsides.
They  roamed  at  will  southwards,  and  eastwards 
even  as  far  as  the  Misty  Mountains;  but  they  were  now 
few  and  rarely  seen.
‘I  did 
not  know  that  your  plight  was  so  evil,’  he  said.
Tom’s  going  home  again  water-lilies  bringing.
So  I 
am  afraid  we  must  be  going.
The  hobbits  shuddered.
And  how  has  it  passed  down  the 
years,  until  it  is  brought  hither  by  so  strange  a  messenger?’ 

‘That  shall  be  told,’  said  Elrond.
“And  why 
not,  Gandalf?”  he  whispered.
I  fear,  Sam,  that  they  believe  your  master  has 
a  deadly  wound  that  will  subdue  him  to  their  will.
Three  of  them!
But  it  cannot  be 
hidden  from  the  Ring-bearer,  and  one  who  has  seen  the  Eye.
And  behold!
‘What  are  you  thinking  about?
Frodo  turned  and  looked  at  him  thoughtfully,  wondering 
about  Gandalf ’s  second  postscript.
Long  ago.
Now  the  Lady  arose,  and  Celeborn  led  them  back  to  the 
hythe.
A  blinding  sheet  of  white  flame  sprang 
up.
It 
was  driven  by  outlandish  folk,  singing  strange  songs:  dwarves 
with  long  beards  and  deep  hoods.
From  the  ashes  afire  shall  be  woken, 

A  light  from  the  shadows  shall  spring; 

Renewed  shall  be  blade  that  was  broken, 

The  crownless  again  shall  be  king.
‘And  there  in  the  dark  pools  amid  the 
Gladden  Fields,’  he  said,  ‘the  Ring  passed  out  of  knowledge 
and  legend;  and  even  so  much  of  its  history  is  known  now 
only  to  a  few,  and  the  Council  of  the  Wise  could  discover  no 
more.
‘Come!’  said  Aragorn.
Frodo  did  not  offer  her  any  tea.
Then  Tom  bowed  to  the 
hobbits.
The  last  was  plainly  old  Fatty 
Lumpkin:  he  was  larger,  stronger,  fatter  (and  older)  than 
their  own  ponies.
O  Gandalf, 
best  of  friends,  what  am  I  to  do?
Swiftly  he  sank  under  its  shining  weight  into  a  deep 
realm  of  sleep.
I  called  for  the  help  of 
the  Dunedain,  and  their  watch  was  doubled;  and  I  opened 
my  heart  to  Aragorn,  the  heir  of  Isildur.’ 

‘And  I,’  said  Aragorn,  ‘counselled  that  we  should  hunt  for 
Gollum,  too  late  though  it  may  seem.
He  was  altogether  wretched.
‘They  will  sing  that,  and 
other  songs  of  the  Blessed  Realm,  many  times  tonight.
We  last  met  on  the  first  of  May: 
at  Sarn  Ford  down  the  Brandywine.
On  the 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


487 


further  side  are  the  bleak  hills  of  the  Emyn  Muil.
Those  who  pass  the  gates  of  Barad-dur  do  not  return.
That’s  a  dark  bad  place,  if  half  the  tales  be  true.’ 

‘You’re  right,  Dad!’  said  the  Gaffer.
I  cannot  think  why 
they  have  gone  and  do  not  attack  again.
Beyond  those  peaks  the  range  bends  round  south-west.
All  hope  left  him.
I  put  the 
fear  of  fire  on  him,  and  wrung  the  true  story  out  of  him,  bit  by 
bit,  together  with  much  snivelling  and  snarling.
‘I  will 
go  first,’  said  Haldir.
Boromir  looked  at  them  doubtfully,  but  he  bowed  his  head.
He  knows  we  mean  to.
‘We  need  sleep,  and  even  if  Aragorn  had  a 
mind  to  pass  the  Gates  of  Argonath  by  night,  we  are  all  too 
tired  -  except,  no  doubt,  our  sturdy  dwarf.’ 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


511 


Gimli  made  no  reply:  he  was  nodding  as  he  sat.
But  I  have  met  my  match, 
and  have  nearly  been  destroyed.
‘A  bath!’  cried  Pippin.
Even  Gimli, 
as  stout  as  any  dwarf  could  be,  was  grumbling  as  he 
trudged.
‘There 
lies  the  Crown  of  Durin  till  he  wakes.
‘First  check!’  said  Pippin,  smiling  grimly.
He  breathed  deep  and  fell  asleep  again.
The  others  will 
be  coming  back  at  any  minute.
Imagine  it:  going  off  to  Mordor  alone!’ 
Pippin  shuddered.
Even  outside  everything  seemed  still.
All  is  dark  now  and 
the  Bridge  of  Nimrodel  is  broken  down.
‘Do  you  think  we  shall  see  anything  of  those  Riders?’  asked 
Pippin  cheerfully.
All  that  day  the  Company  remained  in  hiding.
Men  call  it 
Deadmen’s  Dike,  and  they  fear  to  tread  there.
‘They  won’t  harm  you  -  not  unless  I 
tell  ’em  to.
There’s  something  mighty  queer  behind  this.’  He  was  quite 
right,  but  he  never  found  out  any  more  about  it.
For  each  they  had  pro¬ 
vided  a  hood  and  cloak,  made  according  to  his  size,  of  the 
light  but  warm  silken  stuff  that  the  Galadhrim  wove.
Minas  Tirith  will  fall,  if  the 
Ring  lasts.
He  felt  staggered  to 
think  that  he  had  been  walking  about  with  the  price  of  the 
Shire  under  his  jacket.
Is  that  it?
He  swayed,  clutching  at  Sam’s  arm.
We  are  fond  of  parties.
Then  by  some  shift  of  airs  all  the  mist  was  drawn 
away  like  a  veil,  and  there  leaned  up,  as  he  climbed  over  the 
rim  of  the  world,  the  Swordsman  of  the  Sky,  Menelvagor 
with  his  shining  belt.
Crush  one  in  the  water,  and  wash 
the  wound  clean,  and  I  will  bind  it.
But  your  road  and  our 
road  lie  together  for  many  hundreds  of  miles.
The  name  of  Moria  is 
black.’ 

‘You  speak  of  what  you  do  not  know,  when  you  liken 
Moria  to  the  stronghold  of  Sauron,’  answered  Gandalf.
‘I  meant  no  offence.
I  will  bathe  my  feet, 
for  it  is  said  that  the  water  is  healing  to  the  weary.’  He  went 
forward  and  climbed  down  the  deep-cloven  bank  and  stepped 
into  the  stream.
This  was 
unexpected  and  rather  difficult.
Already  they  seemed  to  have  been  tramping 
on,  on,  endlessly  to  the  mountains’  roots.
‘Look,  my  friends!’  he  called.
‘Show  me  the  precious  Ring!’  he  said  suddenly  in  the  midst 
of  the  story:  and  Frodo,  to  his  own  astonishment,  drew  out 
the  chain  from  his  pocket,  and  unfastening  the  Ring  handed 
it  at  once  to  Tom.
492 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Yet  as  is  the  way  of  Elvish  words,  they  remained  graven  in 
his  memory,  and  long  afterwards  he  interpreted  them,  as  well 
as  he  could:  the  language  was  that  of  Elven-song  and  spoke 
of  things  little  known  on  Middle-earth.
If  he  comes  this  way  at  all,  he 
may  not  pass  through  Bree,  and  so  he  may  not  know  what 
we  are  doing.
They  did  not  talk,  but  kept  glancing  back,  and  from 
side  to  side.
As  you 
showed  in  the  Barrow.
Then  there  was  a  long 
trailing  shriek,  fading  away  into  an  unguessable  distance;  and 
after  that  silence.
For  here  alone  in 
the  world  was  found  Moria-silver,  or  true-silver  as  some  have 
called  it:  mithril  is  the  Elvish  name.
His  plan  -  for  pleasure  and  a  last  look  at  the  Shire  as  much  as 
any  other  reason  -  was  to  walk  from  Hobbiton  to  Bucklebury 
Ferry,  taking  it  fairly  easy.
That  I  have  done,  and 
this  I  have  read: 

Ash  nazg  diirhatuliik,  ash  nazg  gimbatul,  ash  nazg 
thrakatuluk  agh  burzum-ishi  krimpatul.
Rangers  have  been  here  lately.
What  would  Frodo  choose  to 
do?
Wonder 
came  into  his  face,  and  then  he  smiled  in  answer.
A  mile  further  on  they  came  to  a  narrow 
ravine  that  led  away  northwards  through  the  steep  lands  on 
the  left  of  the  Road.
“It’s  the  best  news  I  have  had  since  Midsummer;  it’s  worth 
a  gold  piece  at  the  least.
There  were  probably  many  more 
Outsiders  scattered  about  in  the  West  of  the  World  in  those 
days  than  the  people  of  the  Shire  imagined.
But  still  the  door  is 
closed!’ 

She  lifted  up  her  white  arms,  and  spread  out  her  hands 
towards  the  East  in  a  gesture  of  rejection  and  denial.
‘But 
now  I’ve  a  notion.
Their 
last  meal  had  been  lunch  beside  the  standing  stone  the  day 
before.
As  long  as  you  never  used  it,  I  did 
not  think  that  the  Ring  would  have  any  lasting  effect  on 
you,  not  for  evil,  not  at  any  rate  for  a  very  long  time.
Elrond  and  Arwen  rose 
and  went  down  the  hall,  and  the  company  followed  them 
in  due  order.
I  feel  it.
Sam  had 
dashed  off  first.
Then  as  a  flash  from 
some  other  point  of  power  there  came  to  his  mind  another 
thought:  Take  it  off!
While  here  beyond  the  Sundering  Seas  now  fall  the  Elven- 
tears.
‘You 
must  trust  me  now.
When 
he  heard  them  stir  he  clapped  his  hands,  and  cried:  ‘Hey!
The 
stream  ran  down  the  hill  on  the  left  and  vanished  into  the 
white  shadows.
Well  Masters,’  said  Nob,  ‘I’ve  ruffled  up  the  clothes  and 
put  in  a  bolster  down  the  middle  of  each  bed.
Yes,  my  Precious.’ 

The  wizard’s  face  remained  grave  and  attentive,  and  only 
a  flicker  in  his  deep  eyes  showed  that  he  was  startled  and 
indeed  alarmed.
‘But  we  must  not  use  the  wood 
-  not  unless  it  is  a  choice  between  fire  and  death.’ 

The  Company  set  out  again,  with  good  speed  at  first;  but 
soon  their  way  became  steep  and  difficult.
Soon  the  road  began  to  fall  gently  but  steadily 
into  the  dusk.
In  the  midst  of  it  there  wound  lazily  a  dark  river  of 
brown  water,  bordered  with  ancient  willows,  arched  over 
with  willows,  blocked  with  fallen  willows,  and  flecked  with 
thousands  of  faded  willow-leaves.
Sandyman,’  retorted 
the  Gaffer,  disliking  the  miller  even  more  than  usual.
Northward  the  dale  ran 
up  into  a  glen  of  shadows  between  two  great  arms  of  the 
mountains,  above  which  three  white  peaks  were  shining: 
Celebdil,  Fanuidhol,  Caradhras,  the  Mountains  of  Moria.
Apple,  thorn,  and  nut  and  sloe, 

Let  them  go!
When  they  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  country  westward  the 
distant  Forest  seemed  to  be  smoking,  as  if  the  fallen  rain  was 
steaming  up  again  from  leaf  and  root  and  mould.
Now,  I  was  behind  the  hedge  this 
evening  on  the  Road  west  of  Bree,  when  four  hobbits  came 
out  of  the  Downlands.
When  they  appeared  they  brought 
news  from  afar,  and  told  strange  forgotten  tales  which  were 


196  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

eagerly  listened  to;  but  the  Bree-folk  did  not  make  friends 
of  them.
I  hope  it  is  not  far.
You  might  be  a 
play-acting  spy,  for  all  I  can  see,  trying  to  get  us  to  go  with 


224 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


you.
Sam  and  Frodo  now  feeling  eased  and  greatly 
refreshed  were  able  to  go  at  a  fair  pace,  and  with  only  one 
brief  halt  Aragorn  led  the  Company  on  for  nearly  three  more 
hours.
I  thought  he  would  return  to  you.’ 

‘Is  that  all  that  you  have  to  say?’  said  Aragorn,  looking  hard 
and  not  too  kindly  at  Boromir.
His  real 
business  was  far  more  difficult  and  dangerous,  but  the 
Shire -folk  knew  nothing  about  it.
But 
if  I  am  right  in  my  reckoning,  those  are  still  many  miles 
ahead.
Sam  stood  by  him.
All  we  have  to 
decide  is  what  to  do  with  the  time  that  is  given  us.
But  what 


506  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

the  day  will  show  who  can  tell?
As  they  passed  beyond  the  green  field 
of  the  Tongue,  the  trees  drew  down  to  the  river’s  brink.
I  am  afraid  you 
are  right.
Most 
of  the  guests  went  on  eating  and  drinking  and  discussing 
Bilbo  Baggins’  oddities,  past  and  present;  but  the  Sackville- 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


41 


Bagginses  had  already  departed  in  wrath.
A 
glance  showed  him  that  he  was  now  facing  southwards  and 
was  on  a  round  hill-top,  which  he  must  have  climbed  from 
the  north.
He  shrank  against  the  bole 
of  the  tree.
Have  you  anyone  you 
can  send,  and  trust  to  go?
A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


403 


‘Well,  well!’  said  the  wizard.
He  laughed,  and  going  to  Goldberry,  took  her  hand.
Bilbo  they  want 
news  of.’ 

‘Maybe  you’re  right,’  said  Frodo,  avoiding  the  farmer’s  eye 
and  staring  at  the  fire.
The  hobbits  moved  and  stretched.
Merry!
‘Go  now!’  said  Celeborn.
Another  pierced  Gandalf’s  hat  and  stuck  there  like  a 
black  feather.
’ 

The  change  in  the  wizard’s  voice  was  astounding.
It  did  not  improve 
their  tempers.
It’s  mine 
anyway.”  ’ 

‘That’s  interesting,’  said  Gandalf.
Come,  Boromir!
Tomorrow  you  will  have  to  escape,  if  you  can.
Come  inside!
‘If  I 
understand  aright  all  that  I  have  heard,’  he  said,  ‘I  think  that 
this  task  is  appointed  for  you,  Frodo;  and  that  if  you  do  not 
find  a  way,  no  one  will.
Elis  hope  will  cheat  him.
Maggot  put  this  up  for 
Mr.
Nob’s  hair  was  all  stood  on  end.
I  come  to 
ask  for  counsel  and  the  unravelling  of  hard  words.
For  ANGELICA’S  use,  from  Uncle  Bilbo ;  on  a  round  convex 
mirror.
They 
were  not  in  the  least  satisfied  by  his  explanation  that  he  had 
crawled  away  quickly  under  the  tables  after  he  had  fallen.
Carefully  he  took  it 
off  and  held  it  up,  and  the  gems  on  it  glittered  like  stars,  and 
the  sound  of  the  shaken  rings  was  like  the  tinkle  of  rain  in  a 
pool.
Over  all  his  works  a  dark  smoke  hung  and 
wrapped  itself  about  the  sides  of  Orthanc.
The  hobbits  led  their  ponies  up,  winding  round  and  round 
until  they  reached  the  top.
He  spoke  ‘a  few  suitable 
words’,  as  they  would  have  said  in  the  Shire:  We  are  all  very 
much  gratified  by  the  kindness  of  your  reception,  and  I  venture 
to  hope  that  my  brief  visit  will  help  to  renew  the  old  ties  of 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY  207 

friendship  between  the  Shire  and  Bree;  and  then  he  hesitated 
and  coughed.
‘Of  course  there’s  a  mistake!’  said  Frodo.
‘And  Fd  not  mind  a  glimpse  of  what’s  going  on  at  home,’ 
he  said  in  an  aside  to  Frodo.
Strider  was 
watching  the  moonlight  on  the  hill  intently.
We  have  come  a  long  way  with  you  and  been 
through  some  stiff  times.
‘Our  road 
leads  beside  it  for  many  miles.
He  ought  to  be 
comfortable  here.
Bilbo  Baggins  of  Bag  End  announced  that  he 
would  shortly  be  celebrating  his  eleventy-first  birthday  with 
a  party  of  special  magnificence,  there  was  much  talk  and 
excitement  in  Hobbiton.
‘I  should  think  you  were  malting  it  all  up,’  said  Merry,  ‘if 
I  had  not  seen  that  black  shape  on  the  landing-stage  -  and 
heard  the  queer  sound  in  Maggot’s  voice.
Frodo,  Frodo!’  he  called.
Away  beyond  the  shadows  at  the  western 
end  of  the  hall  there  came  cries  and  horn-calls.
We’ll  see  about 
supper  and  things.’ 

We  had  our  supper  early  with  Farmer  Maggot,’  said 
Frodo;  ‘but  we  could  do  with  another.’ 

‘You  shall  have  it!
If  you  don’t,  if  you  even  breathe 
a  word  of  what  you’ve  heard  here,  then  I  hope  Gandalf  will 
turn  you  into  a  spotted  toad  and  fill  the  garden  full  of  grass- 
snakes.’ 

Sam  fell  on  his  knees,  trembling.
fire!
Boromir  isn’t  lying, 
that’s  not  his  way;  but  he  hasn’t  told  us  everything.
He  had  proved  tougher  than  even  one 
of  the  Wise  would  have  guessed  -  as  a  hobbit  might.
FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS  183 

When  he  came  to  himself  again,  for  a  moment  he  could 
recall  nothing  except  a  sense  of  dread.
Soon  they  struck  a  narrow  road,  that  went  rolling 
up  and  down,  fading  grey  into  the  darkness  ahead:  the  road 
to  Woodhall,  and  Stock,  and  the  Bucklebury  Ferry.
Truly  Elrond  spoke, 
saying  that  we  could  not  foresee  what  we  might  meet  upon 
our  road.
Fire  glowed  amid  the  smoke.
There  was  now 
no  breath  of  wind  stirring;  the  night  was  still  and  quiet,  and 
a  chill  was  in  the  air.
He  shut  his  eyes  and  clung 
to  the  horse’s  mane.
‘If  you  don’t  let  me  in,  Frodo,  I  shall  blow  your  door  right 
down  your  hole  and  out  through  the  hill,’  he  said.
For  Radagast 
knew  no  reason  why  he  should  not  do  as  I  asked;  and  he  rode 
away  towards  Mirkwood  where  he  had  many  friends  of  old.
The  others 
looked  at  him  in  silence,  and  exchanged  meaning  glances 
among  themselves.
steady  there!’  cried  the  old  man,  holding  up 
one  hand,  and  they  stopped  short,  as  if  they  had  been  struck 
stiff.
We  needed  not  the  fell  voice  of  the  messenger  to  warn 
us  that  his  words  held  both  menace  and  deceit;  for  we  knew 
already  that  the  power  that  has  re-entered  Mordor  has  not 
changed,  and  ever  it  betrayed  us  of  old.
‘But  I  am  not 
going  to  give  an  account  of  all  my  doings  to  you.
One  clear  voice  rose  now  above 
the  others.
He 
could  not  speak.
On  the  morning  of  the  last  day  Frodo  was  alone  with  Bilbo, 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH  361 

and  the  old  hobbit  pulled  out  from  under  his  bed  a  wooden 
box.
You  are  the  Bearer  appointed  by  the  Coun¬ 
cil.
‘It  is  wonderful  that  Elrond,  and 
Glorfindel  and  such  great  lords,  not  to  mention  Strider, 
should  take  so  much  trouble  and  show  me  so  much  kindness.’ 

‘Well,  there  are  many  reasons  why  they  should,’  said 
Gandalf,  smiling.
I  had  counted  on  passing  the  Golden 
Perch  at  Stock  before  sundown.
Firelight  came  out,  and  a  puff  of  steam.
Not  once  did  they  feel  the  sense  of  present  evil 
that  had  assailed  them  before  the  attack  in  the  dell.
What  are  the  Black  Riders?’ 

‘Has  Gandalf  told  you  nothing?’ 

‘Nothing  about  such  creatures.’ 

‘Then  I  think  it  is  not  for  me  to  say  more  -  lest  terror 
should  keep  you  from  your  journey.
I  found  it.
He  vanished.
You  should  not  be  waking.
Poor  Bill  the  pony  trembled  and  sweated 
where  he  stood.
You  are  not  thinking  of  what 
you  are  saying.
‘He  would  certainly  never  have  passed  on  to  you 
anything  that  he  thought  would  be  a  danger,  even  though  I 
promised  to  look  after  you.
Anyway:  there  was  this  Mr.
Behind  them  the  sinking  Sun  filled 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


393 


the  cool  western  sky  with  glimmering  gold.
Faint  at  first  and 
then  clearer  ran  the  words.
The  ores  yelled  and  poured  over  the  stone  gangways.
And  if  he  were  given  the  Ring,  he  would  soon 
forget  it,  or  most  likely  throw  it  away.
I  want  to  see  the  wild  country  again  before 
I  die,  and  the  Mountains;  but  he  is  still  in  love  with  the 
Shire,  with  woods  and  fields  and  little  rivers.
‘Begging  your 
pardon,’  said  Sam,  putting  in  his  head,  ‘but  I  was  just  wonder¬ 
ing  if  you  would  be  wanting  anything.’ 

‘And  begging  yours,  Sam  Gamgee,’  replied  Bilbo.
Already  the  fog  was  thinning.
‘As  far 
from  the  Sackville-Bagginses  as  may  be,’  some  added.
He  found  that  he  was  lying,  well 
wrapped,  under  tall  grey-skinned  trees  in  a  quiet  corner  of 
the  woodlands  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Great  River,  Anduin.
But  at  the  same  time  he  felt  deeply  troubled: 
he  realized  suddenly  that  he  loved  the  old  hobbit  dearly.
Yet  that  would  have  to  be  done  that  very  night,  before 
they  all  went  to  bed.
The 
story  of  that  Mr.
‘Can’t  we  get  a  couple  of  ponies  in  the  village,  or  even  one 
just  for  the  baggage?
Some  went  to  and  fro  bearing  cups  and 
pouring  drink;  others  brought  food  on  heaped  plates  and 
dishes.
The 
mountains  were  veiled  in  deepening  dusk,  and  the  wind  was 
cold.
Alas  that  it  is  winter!’ 

Under  the  night  the  trees  stood  tall  before  them,  arched 
over  the  road  and  stream  that  ran  suddenly  beneath  their 
spreading  boughs.
He  found  laid  ready  clean  garments  of  green  cloth  that 
fitted  him  excellently.
‘Here’s  my  pretty  lady!’  he  said,  bowing  to  the  hobbits.
He  made  up  his  mind  at  last  -  to  go.
Merry  and  Pippin  had  followed,  and  were 
already  disappearing  westward  into  the  trees  by  the  shore, 
shouting:  Frodo!
Along  this  they  fled.
At  length  a  silence  fell,  and  they  heard  the  music  of  the 
waterfall  running  sweetly  in  the  shadows.
I  wish  I  could  get  at  Ted,  and  I’d  fell 
himV 

But  now  Sam  noticed  that  the  Old  Mill  had  vanished,  and 
a  large  red-brick  building  was  being  put  up  where  it  had 
stood.
He  leaped  into  the  waters,  but  the  Ring  slipped 
from  his  finger  as  he  swam,  and  then  the  Ores  saw  him  and 
killed  him  with  arrows.’ 

Gandalf  paused.
‘Why,  I  feel  all  thin,  sort  of  stretched ,  if  you  know 
what  I  mean:  like  butter  that  has  been  scraped  over  too  much 
bread.
Then  the  wind  died  away 
and  the  rain  came  streaming  down.
Come  and 
go  as  you  like,  as  long  as  you  don’t  make  a  noise.’ 

They  got  up  and  withdrew  quietly  into  the  shadows,  and 
made  for  the  doors.
Tom  Bombadil  is  master.’ 

A  door  opened  and  in  came  Tom  Bombadil.
But 
still  it  could  be  seen  that  once  long  ago  a  great  paved  way  had 
wound  upwards  from  the  lowlands  to  the  Dwarf-kingdom.
The  night  grew 
dark,  but  the  stars  above  were  strangely  bright,  and  there  was 
a  glimmer  on  the  face  of  the  River.
‘Very  life-like!’  he  said.
An 
occasional  Bucklander  or  adventurous  Took  would  come  out 
to  the  Inn  for  a  night  or  two,  but  even  that  was  becoming 
less  and  less  usual.
Frar  and  Loni  and  Nali  fell  there.
‘And  there  have  been  even  stranger 
travellers  through  Bree  lately,’  he  went  on,  watching  Frodo’s 
face.
‘Also  there  is  this!’  said  Bilbo,  bringing  out  a  parcel  which 
seemed  to  be  rather  heavy  for  its  size.
‘And  now  at  last  it  comes.
486 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


But  if  of  ships  I  now  should  sing,  what  ship  would  come  to 
me, 

What  ship  would  bear  me  ever  back  across  so  wide  a  Sea?
Two  rode  towards  Frodo;  two  galloped  madly 
towards  the  Ford  to  cut  off  his  escape.
Hey!
Just  go  and  tell  him  so!’ 

Merry  left  them  a  long  while  in  the  hall,  and  they  had  time 
to  discover  their  parting  gift  of  spoons.
There 
was  a  little  corner  of  his  mind  that  was  still  his  own,  and  light 
came  through  it,  as  through  a  chink  in  the  dark:  light  out  of 
the  past.
But  had  I  known  that  the  Dwarves 
had  stirred  up  this  evil  in  Moria  again,  I  would  have  forbidden 
you  to  pass  the  northern  borders,  you  and  all  that  went  with 
you.
Still,  I  am  very  glad  someone 
is  stopping  behind,  who  can  tell  Gandalf  what  you  have  done, 
when  he  turns  up,  as  I  am  sure  he  will  before  long.’ 

Fond  as  he  was  of  Frodo,  Fatty  Bolger  had  no  desire  to 
leave  the  Shire,  nor  to  see  what  lay  outside  it.
‘And  I  will  choose  you  companions  to  go  with  you,  as  far 
as  they  will  or  fortune  allows.
‘But  it  does  not  seem  that  I  can  trust  anyone,’  said  Frodo.
‘Here  is  your  sword,’  he  said.
Ever  since  this  spring  we  have  kept  our  eyes  open, 
and  done  a  good  deal  of  planning  on  our  own  account.
The  boats  were  all  huddled  together.
‘No  more  than  you  can  afford,’  answered  Strider  with  a 
slow  smile,  as  if  he  guessed  Frodo’s  thoughts.
Yet 
once  it  was  tall  and  fair.
Some  of  Frodo’s  friends  came  to  stay  and 
help  him  with  the  packing:  there  was  Fredegar  Bolger  and 
Folco  Boffin,  and  of  course  his  special  friends  Pippin  Took 
and  Merry  Brandybuck.
The  threat  of  snow  lifted;  the  clouds  began  to  break 
and  the  light  grew  broader.
And  the  trees  do  not  like  strangers.
‘But  I  found  myself 
suddenly  faced  by  something  that  I  have  not  met  before.
That  will  be  safest.’ 

‘No,  don’t  give  the  ring  to  me,’  said  Gandalf.
But  at 
that  moment  Merry  gave  a  whistle  of  relief  and  pointed  ahead.
An  odd-looking 
waggon  laden  with  odd-looking  packages  rolled  into  Hobbi- 
ton  one  evening  and  toiled  up  the  Hill  to  Bag  End.
Steady!’  cried  Gandalf,  as  Merry  and  Pippin 
pushed  forward,  glad  to  find  a  place  where  they  could  rest 
with  at  least  more  feeling  of  shelter  than  in  the  open  passage.
We  shall  be  hard  put  to 
it.
It  is  quite  plain,  and  it 
never  shows  a  scratch  or  sign  of  wear.’ 

‘Well  then,  look!’  To  Frodo’s  astonishment  and  distress 
the  wizard  threw  it  suddenly  into  the  middle  of  a  glowing 
corner  of  the  fire.
I  felt  it.
‘Of  course.
The  next  day  they  began 
to  steer  a  steady  course  eastwards;  and  still  all  was  quiet  and 
peaceful.
‘The  road  must  be  trod, 
but  it  will  be  very  hard.
You  have  been  much  too 
careless  so  far.
I  daresay  he  does.
Then  he  gave  way 
before  us,  but  only  feigned  to  flee,  and  soon  after  came  to 
the  Dark  Tower  and  openly  declared  himself.
Still,  we  can  only 
go  on.’ 

Soon  the  light  became  unmistakable,  and  could  be  seen  by 
all.
That  accident  has 
made  your  position  dangerous.’ 

‘Hardly  more  than  it  was  already,’  said  Frodo.
But  I  am  afraid  there  is  no 
possible  doubt:  he  had  made  his  slow,  sneaking  way,  step  by 
step,  mile  by  mile,  south,  down  at  last  to  the  Land  of  Mordor.’ 

A  heavy  silence  fell  in  the  room.
Tom  came  out  of  the  house  and  waved  his 
hat  and  danced  upon  the  doorstep,  bidding  the  hobbits  to 
get  up  and  be  off  and  go  with  good  speed.
The  Ring!’  said  Boromir,  his  eyes  lighting.
Her  voice  was  clear  and 
musical,  but  deeper  than  woman’s  wont.
If  that’s  where  you  get 
your  news  from,  you’ll  never  want  for  moonshine.
As  they  stood  for  a  moment  looking  at  the  white  water 
in  the  sunlight,  Haldir  came  walking  towards  them  over  the 
green  grass  of  the  glade.
Farewell,  and  may  the  blessing  of  Elves 
and  Men  and  all  Free  Folk  go  with  you.
He  has 
dwelt  in  the  West  since  the  days  of  dawn,  and  I  have  dwelt 
with  him  years  uncounted;  for  ere  the  fall  of  Nargothrond  or 
Gondolin  I  passed  over  the  mountains,  and  together  through 
ages  of  the  world  we  have  fought  the  long  defeat.
There  the  green  floor  ran  on  into  the  wood,  and  formed  a 
wide  space  like  a  hall,  roofed  by  the  boughs  of  trees.
What  about  helping  me  with  my  book,  and  making 
a  start  on  the  next?
At  last  they  got  the  idea  that  enemies  were 
in  Buckland,  some  strange  invasion  from  the  Old  Forest.
As  the  stars  above  the 
mists  of  the  Northern  lands  was  her  loveliness,  and  in  her 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


253 


face  was  a  shining  light.
‘Come!
Moria!
Frodo  was  waiting  on  the  step,  smiling,  but  looking  rather 
tired  and  worried.
But  Bilbo  had  not  finished.
Sam  sat  in  the  bows,  clutching  the  sides,  and  looking 
back  wistfully  to  the  shore.
It’s  cool  under  the  willows.
Whatever  perils  lay  ahead,  it  seemed 
better  to  float  down  the  broad  tide  of  Anduin  to  meet  them 
than  to  plod  forward  with  bent  backs.
Then  he 
stopped,  and  a  shadow  came  over  his  face,  and  he  closed  his 
eyes.
I 
cannot  now  be  certain,  but  I  think  there  were  many  booted 
feet.’  He  paused  and  stood  in  anxious  thought.
I  feared 
all  along  that  we  should  be  obliged  to  take  this  road.’ 

The  day  was  drawing  to  its  end,  and  cold  stars  were  glinting 
in  the  sky  high  above  the  sunset,  when  the  Company,  with 
all  the  speed  they  could,  climbed  up  the  slopes  and  reached 
the  side  of  the  lake.
The  shadow  fell  on  me  again.
‘What  is  it?’  said  the  dwarf.
So  Frodo  and  Sam  set  off  on  the  last  stage  of  the  Quest 
together.
We  may  well  be 
seen  by  watchers  on  that  narrow  path,  and  waylaid  by  some 
evil;  but  the  weather  may  prove  a  more  deadly  enemy  than 
any.
Then  I  felt  terri¬ 
fied,  and  I  turned  back,  and  was  just  going  to  bolt  home, 
when  something  came  behind  me  and  I  ...
Unwearied  then  were  Durin  ’s  folk; 

Beneath  the  mountains  music  woke: 

The  harpers  harped,  the  minstrels  sang, 

And  at  the  gates  the  trumpets  rang.
It  is  close  to  the  Road.’ 

‘But  surely  we  were  hoping  to  find  Gandalf  there?’ 

‘Yes;  but  the  hope  is  faint.
Wolves  and  snakes!
Therefore  we 
should  leave  by  the  eastern  arch  of  the  hall,  and  bear  right 
and  south,  and  go  downwards.
The  path 
stopped  climbing,  and  became  for  a  while  nearly  level.
When  it  reached  the  tree  and  was  level  with  Frodo  the 
horse  stopped.
It  was  a  good  brew,  and  Pippin  found 
himself  more  than  compensated  for  missing  the  Golden  Perch.
210 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


disappeared.
We  cannot 
hope  to  find  a  path  through  these  hills.
‘I  have  been  reckoning,’  he  said,  ‘and  I  can’t  bring 
the  total  up  to  October  the  twenty-fourth.
Then  he  drew  it,  and  its  polished  and 
well-tended  blade  glittered  suddenly,  cold  and  bright.
All 
wrong,  if  it  wasn’t  a  dream.
And  you  must  go,  or  at  least  set  out,  either 
North,  South,  West  or  East  -  and  the  direction  should  cer¬ 
tainly  not  be  known.’ 

‘I  have  been  so  taken  up  with  the  thoughts  of  leaving  Bag 
End,  and  of  saying  farewell,  that  I  have  never  even  considered 
the  direction,’  said  Frodo.
‘There  is  the  land  where  our  fathers  worked 
of  old,  and  we  have  wrought  the  image  of  those  mountains 
into  many  works  of  metal  and  of  stone,  and  into  many 
songs  and  tales.
‘Books  ought  to  have  good 
endings.
Out  flew  a  red-golden 
dragon  -  not  life-size,  but  terribly  life-like:  fire  came  from  his 
jaws,  his  eyes  glared  down;  there  was  a  roar,  and  he  whizzed 
three  times  over  the  heads  of  the  crowd.
I’d  not  long  come 
prentice  to  old  Holman  (him  being  my  dad’s  cousin),  but  he 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


31 


had  me  up  at  Bag  End  helping  him  to  keep  folks  from  tram¬ 
pling  and  trapessing  all  over  the  garden  while  the  sale  was 
on.
‘It  is 
no  good  going  on.
‘And  what 
business  is  it  of  yours,  anyway,  to  know  what  I  do  with  my 
own  things?
Baggins  would  be  let  through.
“Now  what  in  the  Shire  can  he  want?”  I  thought  to 
myself.
I  had  weary  days  of  it.
Pippin  sat  miserably  by  the  door  in  the  pitch  dark;  but  he 
kept  on  turning  round,  fearing  that  some  unknown  thing 
would  crawl  up  out  of  the  well.
It  could  be  beaten  like  copper, 
and  polished  like  glass;  and  the  Dwarves  could  make  of  it  a 
metal,  light  and  yet  harder  than  tempered  steel.
But  I  may 
say  that  I  know  all  the  lands  between  the  Shire  and  the  Misty 
Mountains,  for  I  have  wandered  over  them  for  many  years.
They  have  drawn  off  for  the  time  being.
Let  us 
go  on!’ 

‘Dressed  up  like  this,  sir?’  said  Sam.
It  was  dark  in  the 
yard,  when  the  guests  came  out.
Yet  he  had  heard  something,  or  thought  he  had.
For  they  sniff  danger  ahead  which  you 
walk  right  into;  and  if  they  run  to  save  themselves,  then  they 
run  the  right  way.
Peregrin  Took,  I  should  say!’  he  cried,  changing 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS 


121 


from  a  scowl  to  a  grin.
It 
would  be  mad  and  cruel  to  let  Frodo  go  to  Mordor.
If  you  come  late  you’ll  get  grass  and 
rain-water!’ 

Needless  to  say  -  not  that  Tom’s  threat  sounded  very 
serious  -  the  hobbits  came  soon,  and  left  the  table  late  and 
only  when  it  was  beginning  to  look  rather  empty.
Sing  hey!
Some  things  are  ill  to  hear  when  the  world’s  in 
shadow.
The  Sackville-Bagginses  were  rather  offensive.
*  See  note  2,  III,  p.
There  was  a  guard  of  ores  crouching  in  the  shadows  behind 
the  great  door-posts  towering  on  either  side,  but  the  gates 
were  shattered  and  cast  down.
‘But  I  cannot  imagine  any  animal 
running  home  to  him,  once  it  got  away.
Well,  it  can’t  be  helped.
‘I  think 
that  will  do  -  but  it  must  not  be  any  later.
‘But  we  have  got  to  try  and 
get  there;  and  it  won’t  be  done  by  sitting  and  thinking.
But  in  the  night  we  heard  more.
What  it  was  could  not  be  seen:  it  was  like  a 
great  shadow,  in  the  middle  of  which  was  a  dark  form,  of 
man-shape  maybe,  yet  greater;  and  a  power  and  terror 
seemed  to  be  in  it  and  to  go  before  it.
He  spoke  aloud  to 


524  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

himself.
That  is  what  he  most  fears, 
I  deem.
‘Go 
with  words  of  guard  and  guiding  on  you,’  he  said.
Already  you  too,  Frodo, 
cannot  easily  let  it  go,  nor  will  to  damage  it.
Big  Folk 
could  hardly  beg  for  lodgings  in  hobbit-holes.
Worse  than  anything  your  friends  could  have  said!
‘All  the  same,’  said  Sam,  ‘you  can’t  deny  that  others  besides 
our  Halfast  have  seen  queer  folk  crossing  the  Shire  -  crossing 
it,  mind  you:  there  are  more  that  are  turned  back  at  the 
borders.
They  themselves  went  silently.
But  except  on  high  days 
it  usually  stands  empty  and  quiet,  and  people  come  here  who 
wish  for  peace,  and  thought.
Frodo  came  in  soon  afterwards,  and  found  him  sitting  in 
the  dark,  deep  in  thought.
‘Gandalf  is  here.
THE  BRIDGE  OF  ICHAZAD-DUM 


431 


‘You  cannot  pass!’  he  said.
laurie  lantar  lassi  surinen, 
yeni  unotime  ve  ramar  aldaron!
And  now  we  must  enter  the 
Golden  Wood,  you  say.
Why  doesn’t  Gandalf  do  something  quick?’  said  Pippin.
Aragorn  was 
against  it,  until  the  pass  over  the  mountains  had  at  least  been 
tried.’ 

‘If  it  is  a  worse  road  than  the  Redhorn  Gate,  then  it  must 
be  evil  indeed,’  said  Merry.
Suddenly  it  gave  way  to 
a  look  of  relief  and  a  laugh.
The  swords  and  knives  of  the  defenders  shone 
and  flickered.
In  fact 
he  offered  to  once,  just  before  the  party.
Their  feet  disturbed  a  deep  dust  upon  the  floor,  and 
stumbled  among  things  lying  in  the  doorway  whose  shapes 
they  could  not  at  first  make  out.
As  they  went  down  the  mist  became  colder 
and  damper,  and  their  hair  hung  lank  and  dripping  on  their 
foreheads.
Gandalf  walked  in  front,  and  with  him  went  Aragorn,  who 
knew  this  land  even  in  the  dark.
Something  dark  as  a  cloud 
was  blocking  out  all  the  light  inside,  and  I  was  thrown  back¬ 
wards  down  the  stairs.
Anyway,  she  had  come  to  see  that  nothing 
she  had  paid  for  had  been  carried  off;  and  she  wanted  the 
keys.
’ 

To  the  left  of  the  great  arch  they  found  a  stone  door:  it 
was  half  closed,  but  swung  back  easily  to  a  gentle  thrust.
‘All  right,’  he  said  with  an  effort.
This  is  no 
treasure -hunt,  no  there-and-back  journey.
Gandalf  led  them  to  the  porch  where  Frodo  had  found  his 
friends  the  evening  before.
In  the  days  of  Durin  they  were  not 
secret.
‘Nonetheless  I  do  not  ask  your  pardon, 
Master  Elrond.
For 
the  grim  years  were  removed  from  the  face  of  Aragorn,  and 
he  seemed  clothed  in  white,  a  young  lord  tall  and  fair;  and 
he  spoke  words  in  the  Elvish  tongue  to  one  whom  Frodo 
could  not  see.
As  far  as  he  could  remember,  Sam  slept  through  the  night 
in  deep  content,  if  logs  are  contented.
My 
heart  is  against  his  going.’ 

‘Then,  Master  Elrond,  you  will  have  to  lock  me  in  prison, 
or  send  me  home  tied  in  a  sack,’  said  Pippin.
But  there  is  no  feeling 
of  their  presence  anywhere  at  hand.’ 

When  he  heard  what  Frodo  had  to  tell,  he  became  full  of 


258 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


concern,  and  shook  his  head  and  sighed.
Leave  a  message  for  me  here,  if 
you  pass  through  Bree.
But  if  I  cannot,  we  shall  have  to  try  and  lose  him.
‘Let  me  hear  it!’ 

Frodo  was  left  to  himself  for  a  while,  for  Sam  had  fallen 
asleep.
Back  to  the  hall!’ 

Gandalf  had  hardly  spoken  these  words,  when  there  came 
a  great  noise:  a  rolling  Boom  that  seemed  to  come  from  depths 
far  below,  and  to  tremble  in  the  stone  at  their  feet.
But  after  a  while  the  air  began  to  get  hot  and  stuffy.
‘Surely  this  is  a  troll-hole,  if  ever  there  was  one!’  said 
Pippin.
It  was  an  ancient  defence  of  the 
Dwarves  against  any  enemy  that  might  capture  the  First  Hall 
and  the  outer  passages.
The  black  figures  fled  from  the  house.
I  am  getting 
very  old,  and  I  began  to  wonder  if  I  should  live  to  see  your 
chapters  of  our  story.
‘Mr.
I  like  walking 
under  the  stars.
Why  weren’t  you  at  the  feast?
Hop  along,  my  hearties!
‘Very  good:  I  will  go  east,  and  I 
will  make  for  Rivendell.
I  listened  because  I  couldn’t  help  myself,  if  you 
know  what  I  mean.
Name  it,  I  bid  you!
Come  hoy  now!
You  will  learn  that  your  trouble  is  but  part  of  the  trouble  of 
all  the  western  world.
‘Why,  I  thought  you  were  staying 
on  for  at  least  a  week.
‘Yes,’  he  said  with  a  smile.
That  was  part  of  their  plan,  no  doubt.’ 

‘There  is  one  crumb  of  comfort,’  said  Merry,  ‘and  more 
than  a  crumb,  I  hope:  we  can  have  breakfast  while  we  wait  - 
and  sit  down  to  it.
But  it  is  not  daylight.
The 
pursuit  would  follow  you  and  leave  us  in  peace,  I  think.
Frodo 
and  all,  I’d  best  be  turning  for  home.
‘The  dawn  is  not 
far  off.’ 

‘If  any  dawn  can  pierce  these  clouds,’  said  Gimli.
Gimli  wept  openly.
They  dreaded  to  see  black 
figures  waiting  there,  but  they  saw  none.
Took,  now: 
he’s  not  vanished.’ 

‘Well,  I  saw  what  I  saw,  and  I  saw  what  I  didn’t,’  said 
Mugwort  obstinately.
He  is  not  slain,  and  I  think  he  will  resist  the  evil  power  of  the 
wound  longer  than  his  enemies  expect.
Behind  them  Sam  came  upon  a  small  store 
of  firewood  neatly  stacked.
And  yet  it  would  be  a  relief  in  a  way  not 
to  be  bothered  with  it  any  more.
His  grey  thirsty  spirit 
drew  power  out  of  the  earth  and  spread  like  fine  root-threads 
in  the  ground,  and  invisible  twig-fingers  in  the  air,  till  it  had 
under  its  dominion  nearly  all  the  trees  of  the  Forest  from  the 
Hedge  to  the  Downs.
Bilbo  was  busy:  writing  invitations,  ticking  off 
answers,  packing  up  presents,  and  making  some  private 
preparations  of  his  own.
It 
checked  at  the  water  and  reared  up.
I  had  to  choose,  Mr.
What  is  more,  he  knew  where  he  came  from.’ 

‘But  how  did  he  find  that  out?’  asked  Frodo.
In  their  white  faces  burned  keen  and  merciless  eyes;  under 
their  mantles  were  long  grey  robes;  upon  their  grey  hairs  were 
helms  of  silver;  in  their  haggard  hands  were  swords  of  steel.
‘But  in  the  wearing  of  the  swift  years  of  Middle-earth  the 
line  of  Meneldil  son  of  Anarion  failed,  and  the  Tree  withered, 
and  the  blood  of  the  Numenoreans  became  mingled  with  that 
of  lesser  men.
There  shall  be  shown  a  token 
That  Doom  is  near  at  hand, 

For  Isildur’s  Bane  shall  waken, 

And  the  Halfling  forth  shall  stand.
It  gurgled  under  the  walls,  and  was  rising  slowly  but 
surely.
‘There  is  no  sound  outside  here  yet,’  said  Aragorn,  who 
was  standing  by  the  eastern  door  listening.
I  am  Mr.
The  ground  now  became  damp,  and  in  places  boggy  and 
here  and  there  they  came  upon  pools,  and  wide  stretches  of 
reeds  and  rushes  filled  with  the  warbling  of  little  hidden  birds.
It  was  so  steep  and  overhung  that  it  proved 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


151 

impossible  to  climb  out  of  it  again,  either  forwards  or  back¬ 
wards,  without  leaving  their  ponies  and  their  baggage  behind.
And  how  soon  could  we  get  off?
Whoa!
It  was  tall  and  netted  over  with 
silver  cobwebs.
‘That  is  a  line  of  trees,’  said  Merry, 
‘and  that  must  mark  the  Road.
Underhill!
‘That  sounds  like  a  bit  of  old  Bilbo’s  rhyming,’  said  Pippin.
You  could  see  them,  and  they  could 
see  you.’ 

‘I  know,’  said  Frodo.
Along  the 
skirts  of  the  Dead  Marshes  I  followed  it,  and  then  I  had  him.
But  something  prompted  him  to  make  sure.
Hoy!’  It  was  away  eastward,  on  his  left  as  he  stood  under  the 
great  stones,  staring  and  straining  into  the  gloom.
‘If  you  say  that  again,  I  shall.
‘The  Old  Road,  which 


240  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

we  have  left  far  away  on  our  right,  runs  to  the  south  of  it  and 
passes  not  far  from  its  foot.
Shall 
we  turn  west  with  Boromir  and  go  to  the  wars  of  Gondor;  or 
turn  east  to  the  Fear  and  Shadow;  or  shall  we  break  our 
fellowship  and  go  this  way  and  that  as  each  may  choose?
This 
then  is  one  choice  before  you,  before  us.
Let’s 
go  off  into  a  corner  and  polish  it  up!’ 

Strider  smiled.
Yet  I  could  wish,  were  it  of  any  avail,  that  the 
One  Ring  had  never  been  wrought,  or  had  remained  for  ever 
lost.’ 

‘You  are  wise  and  fearless  and  fair,  Lady  Galadriel,’  said 
Frodo.
The  Riders  must 
have  left  their  horses  outside,  and  passed  back  through  the 
South-gate  in  secret.
I  could 
not  hope  to  do  more.
“You  step 
into  the  Road,  and  if  you  don’t  keep  your  feet,  there  is  no 
knowing  where  you  might  be  swept  off  to.
It  was  a  path 
made  by  strong  arms  and  heavy  feet.
But  it  is  not  a  pleasant  way,  and  I 
have  not  spoken  of  it  to  the  Company  before.
Your  talk  of  sniffing 
riders  with  invisible  noses  has  unsettled  me.’ 

‘Yes,  I  think  we  will  move  on  now,’  said  Frodo;  ‘but  not 
on  the  road  -  in  case  that  rider  comes  back,  or  another  follows 
him.
‘I  am  alive,  and  whole  I 
think.
He  was  smoking  now  in  silence,  for  Frodo  was  sitting  still, 
deep  in  thought.
Then  half  turning  they  thrust  them  with  all  their 
strength  towards  the  western  shore.
Even  Strider  seemed  tired  and  heavy- 
hearted.
From  Frodo’s  mind  the  bright  morning  -  treacherously 
bright,  he  thought  -  had  not  banished  the  fear  of  pursuit;  and 
he  pondered  the  words  of  Gildor.
‘Just  a  plain  hobbit  you  look,’  said  Bilbo.
The  lands  ahead  were  empty  of  all  save  birds  and  beasts, 
unfriendly  places  deserted  by  all  the  races  of  the  world.
We 
shall  be  making  an  early  start.
A  strong  company  of  Ores  has  passed.
So  strong  that, 
almost  before  he  realized  what  he  was  doing,  his  hand  was 
groping  in  his  pocket.
‘There  is  a  way  that  we  may  attempt,’  said  Gandalf.
So  silent  was  it  that 
the  fall  of  their  ponies’  hoofs,  rustling  on  dead  leaves  and 
occasionally  stumbling  on  hidden  roots,  seemed  to  thud  in 
their  ears.
Chapter  7 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL 


The  sun  was  sinking  behind  the  mountains,  and  the  shadows 
were  deepening  in  the  woods,  when  they  went  on  again.
But  lunch  and  tea  were 
marked  chiefly  by  the  fact  that  at  those  times  all  the  guests 
were  sitting  down  and  eating  together.
But  I  was  wondering 
what  these  were  made  of,  knowing  a  bit  about  rope-making: 
it’s  in  the  family  as  you  might  say.’ 

‘They  are  made  of  hithlain,’  said  the  Elf,  ‘but  there  is  no 
time  now  to  instruct  you  in  the  art  of  their  making.
‘Tom  Bombadil 
recommended  it.
I’m  not  a  thief,  whatever  he  said.’ 

‘I  have  never  called  you  one,’  Gandalf  answered.
Do  you  see  anything?’ 

On  the  far  stage,  under  the  distant  lamps,  they  could  just 
make  out  a  figure:  it  looked  like  a  dark  black  bundle  left 
behind.
But  the  Gaffer  did  not  convince  his  audience.
‘It  cannot  be  helped,  dear 
friends.
He  had  sud¬ 
denly  realized  that  flying  from  the  Shire  would  mean  more 
painful  partings  than  merely  saying  farewell  to  the  familiar 
comforts  of  Bag  End.
One  by  one  Boromir  and  Aragorn  carried  the  boats,  while 
the  others  toiled  and  scrambled  after  them  with  the  baggage.
‘This  is  grievous  news  concerning  Saruman,’  he  said;  ‘for 
we  trusted  him  and  he  is  deep  in  all  our  counsels.
I’ve  a  drop  of  good  ale  on  tap,  if  you  and  your 
friends  are  willing,  Mr.
Or  have  you  no  wits  left?
It  came  to 
him  suddenly  that  he  was  looking  urgently  for  something, 
but  what  it  was  he  did  not  know.
‘He’s 
been  away  ages  now.’ 

‘How  long  is  it  since  you  saw  Frodo  last,  Boromir?’  asked 
Aragorn.
‘I  don’t  deny  it,  but  I’ll  never  believe  you  are  sleep¬ 
ing  again,  whether  you  snore  or  not.
‘Here  all  are 
enemies  of  the  one  Enemy,  and  yet  I  must  walk  blind,  while 
the  sun  is  merry  in  the  woodland  under  leaves  of  gold!’ 

‘Folly  it  may  seem,’  said  Haldir.
Bilbo  looked  quickly  at  Frodo’s  face  and  passed 
his  hand  across  his  eyes.
Do  you  wish  to  look?’ 

Frodo  did  not  answer.
‘Have  peace  now,’  she  said,  ‘until  the  morning!
I  wish 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


501 


I  could  lay  my  hands  on  the  wretch.
Follow  me!’ 

They  stumbled  wildly  up  the  great  stairs  beyond  the  door, 
Aragorn  leading,  Boromir  at  the  rear.
And  you  are  lucky  to  be  here, 
too,  after  all  the  absurd  things  you  have  done  since  you  left 
home.’ 

Frodo  lay  down  again.
‘I  sup¬ 
pose  you  know  who  you’ve  taken  up  with?
Even  as  they  looked  out  in  dismay  towards  the  setting 
sun,  it  sank  before  their  eyes  into  a  white  sea,  and  a  cold  grey 
shadow  sprang  up  in  the  East  behind.
Often  he 
had  been  for  long  the  guest  of  the  Lords  of  the  City.
‘At  once!’  cried  Frodo.
No!’  he 
said,  opening  his  eyes.
At  last  there  came  a  knock  on  the  door.
To  Frodo  it 
appeared  that  a  white  light  was  shining  through  the  form  and 
raiment  of  the  rider,  as  if  through  a  thin  veil.
Then 


430 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Boromir  raised  his  horn  and  blew.
* 

Fare  Well!
Thank  you  very  much  indeed 
for  your  kindness!
At  ninety  he  was 
much  the  same  as  at  fifty.
‘Run  away  now!’  said  Gandalf.
Some  way  ahead  Strider 
had  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  Loudwater  again,  and  he  knew 
that,  though  it  was  hidden  from  view,  the  Road  to  the  Ford 
was  not  far  from  the  River  and  lay  on  the  side  nearest  to 
them.
Radagast  is,  of  course,  a 
worthy  Wizard,  a  master  of  shapes  and  changes  of  hue;  and 
he  has  much  lore  of  herbs  and  beasts,  and  birds  are  especially 
his  friends.
‘To  the  end  of  the  journey  -  in  the  end,’  said  Gandalf.
Where  to?
Caveyard!
Our  paths  cross  theirs  seldom,  by 
chance  or  purpose.
Looking  back  they  could  see  the  dark  line  of  the 
Hedge  through  the  stems  of  trees  that  were  already  thick 
about  them.
In  any 
case  he  felt  that  he  was  commanded  urgently  to  halt.
Time!’ 

‘Coming,  sir!’  came  the  answer  from  far  within,  followed 
soon  by  Sam  himself,  wiping  his  mouth.
‘There  it  lies,’  he  said,  pointing  away  south-eastwards  to 
where  the  mountains’  sides  fell  sheer  into  the  shadows  at  their 
feet.
They  rested  for  some 
time  in  the  glade,  and  took  their  mid-day  meal  right  under 
the  shadow  of  the  trolls’  large  legs.
Honestly,  I  nearly 
tried  on  Bilbo’s  ring.
At  least  so  it  is  recorded,  is  it  not,  Gimli?’ 

‘It  is,’  said  the  dwarf.
Here  let  us  hope 
that  the  virtue  of  the  Elves  will  keep  us  tonight  from  the  peril 
that  comes  behind.’ 

‘If  Elves  indeed  still  dwell  here  in  the  darkening  world,’ 
said  Gimli.
The  rain,  however,  did  not  last  long.
You  meant  to  leave  the 
Shire,  of  course.
A  great  smoke  went  up.
For  still  there  are  so  many  things 
that  I  have  never  seen: 
in  every  wood  in  every  spring 
there  is  a  different  green.
You  had  better  take  it  and  deliver  it  for  me.
What  are  we  coming 
to?’ 

‘Dark  times,’  said  Strider.
Strider 
had  drawn  the  curtains  and  pushed  back  the  shutters  with  a 
clang.
I  want  to  see  moun¬ 
tains  again,  Gandalf  -  mountains',  and  then  find  somewhere 
where  I  can  rest.
A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


415 


When  he  lay  down  he  quickly  went  to  sleep,  but  it  seemed 
to  him  that  the  dream  went  on:  he  heard  whispers,  and  saw 
the  two  pale  points  of  light  approaching,  slowly.
The  Dark  Lord 
is  putting  forth  all  his  strength.
Bless  me,  but  it  has  been  good  to  see  you  again!
‘The  mail  is  marvellously  light,’  he  said.
‘But,  of  course,  I  have 
my  price.’ 

What  do  you  mean?’  asked  Frodo  sharply.
It  is  very  precious.
It 
seemed  fainthearted  to  go  jogging  aside  over  the  crumpled 
skirts  of  the  downs  towards  the  Road,  when  they  should  be 
leaping,  as  lusty  as  Tom,  over  the  stepping  stones  of  the  hills 
straight  towards  the  Mountains.
‘Of  course  not!’  said  Gandalf.
Then  he  gave  a 
low  gasp,  for  the  stars  went  out.
In  places  the  snow  was  breast-high, 
and  often  Boromir  seemed  to  be  swimming  or  burrowing 
with  his  great  arms  rather  than  walking.
I  thought,  well,  that  they  were  just  big, 
and  rather  stupid:  kind  and  stupid  like  Butterbur;  or  stupid 
and  wicked  like  Bill  Ferny.
Fear  was  ever  in  my  heart  for  my  friends  in  the 
Shire;  but  still  I  had  some  hope.
It  seemed 
too  much  to  hope  that  the  Riders  had  already  lost  their  trail 
again.
And  shining  spears  were  laid  in  hoard.
You  were  never  a  traveller,  unless 
driven  by  great  need.” 

‘“I  have  an  urgent  errand,”  he  said.
They  crossed  the  Bridge  in 
safety,  hearing  no  sound  but  the  water  swirling  against  its 
three  great  arches.
‘We  have  not  spoken  to  Haldir  of  our  deeds  or  our  pur¬ 
pose,’  said  Legolas.
Between  them  they  turned  the  whole 
place  upside-down.
They  stood  up,  and  one  of  them 
uncovered  a  small  lamp  that  gave  out  a  slender  silver  beam.
It  was  hot  when  I  first  took  it,  hot  as  a  glede,  and  my 
hand  was  scorched,  so  that  I  doubt  if  ever  again  I  shall  be 
free  of  the  pain  of  it.
‘I  will  diminish,  and  go  into  the 
West,  and  remain  Galadriel.’ 

They  stood  for  a  long  while  in  silence.
‘I  cannot  thank  you  as  I  should,  Bilbo,  for  this,  and  for  all 
your  past  kindnesses,’  said  Frodo.
Mind  your  Ps  and 
Qs,  and  don’t  forget  that  you  are  supposed  to  be  escaping  in 
secret,  and  are  still  on  the  high-road  and  not  very  far  from 
the  Shire!’ 

‘All  right!’  said  Pippin.
‘“Saruman,”  I  said,  standing  away  from  him,  “only  one 
hand  at  a  time  can  wield  the  One,  and  you  know  that  well, 
so  do  not  trouble  to  say  we\  But  I  would  not  give  it,  nay,  I 
would  not  give  even  news  of  it  to  you,  now  that  I  learn  your 
mind.
The  Elves  sat  round  the  fire  upon  the  grass  or  upon  the  sawn 
rings  of  old  trunks.
‘I  am  sorry  to  take  leave  of  Master  Bombadil,’  said  Sam.
I  don’t  want  to  leave.
In  the  stern  sat  Aragorn  son  of 
Arathorn,  proud  and  erect,  guiding  the  boat  with  skilful 
strokes;  his  hood  was  cast  back,  and  his  dark  hair  was  blowing 
in  the  wind,  a  light  was  in  his  eyes:  a  king  returning  from 
exile  to  his  own  land.
‘I  do 
not  think  the  Road  will  prove  too  hard  for  your  courage.
They  led  their  ponies  under  the  arch,  and  leaving  them 
standing  in  the  yard  they  climbed  up  the  steps.
They  spoke  little  as  they  trudged 
along.
The  watching  eyes  were  suddenly  extinguished.
But  it  is  no  good  flying  blindly  this 
way  with  the  pursuit  just  behind.
But 
Celebrimbor  was  aware  of  him,  and  hid  the  Three  which  he 
had  made;  and  there  was  war,  and  the  land  was  laid  waste, 
and  the  gate  of  Moria  was  shut.
The  spies  of  Sauron  had  hitherto 
seldom  been  seen  in  this  empty  country,  and  the  paths  were 
little  known  except  to  the  people  of  Rivendell.
The  last  few  miles,  they  felt, 
would  soon  be  behind  them.
We  don’t  want  to  be  left  behind.
The  others  may  walk  free  for  a  while,  until  we  come 
nearer  to  our  dwellings,  down  in  Egladil,  in  the  Angle  between 
the  waters.’ 

This  was  not  at  all  to  the  liking  of  Gimli.
As  soon  as  Sam  had  struck  a  spark 
into  the  tinder,  it  kindled  the  dry  grass  and  a  flurry  of  flame 
and  smoke  went  up.
Time  flows  on  to  a  spring  of  little  hope.’ 

The  night  passed  silently.
Few  indeed  are  permitted  even  to  set 
foot  there.
The  black  figures  passed 
swiftly  in.
Gandalf  has  been  here  often.
‘You  make  that  clearer  with  every 
word  you  say.
People  became  enthusiastic;  and  they 
began  to  tick  off  the  days  on  the  calendar;  and  they  watched 
eagerly  for  the  postman,  hoping  for  invitations.
He  used  to  tell  me  tales 
like  that,  knowing  how  I  was  always  one  for  hearing  about 
Elves.
372 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘There  may  be  many  unexpected  feasts  ahead  for  you.
It 
was  cracked  and  weather-worn,  and  the  faint  runes  upon  its 
side  could  not  be  read.
You,  Pippin,  can 
go  on  the  first  watch,  as  a  reward,’  he  growled,  as  he  rolled 
himself  in  a  blanket.
It  seemed  to  him  that  he  would  never 
hear  again  a  running  water  so  beautiful,  for  ever  blending  its 
innumerable  notes  in  an  endless  changeful  music.
Frodo  breathed  heavily 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  KHAZAD-DUM  425 

and  leaned  against  Sam,  who  put  his  arms  about  him.
‘It  is  a  beryl,  an  elf-stone.
Then  he 
got  up  and  walked  away,  and  called  Sam  to  him.
You  speak  of  danger,  but  you  do  not  understand.
The  dogs  howl  and  the  geese  scream 
at  them.’ 

‘Because  these  horses  are  born  and  bred  to  the  service  of 
the  Dark  Lord  in  Mordor.
Tall  and  white 
and  fair  she  walked  beneath  the  trees.
Heed 
no  nightly  noise!
Some,  too,  will 
remember  also  that  Saruman  dissuaded  us  from  open  deeds 
against  him,  and  for  long  we  watched  him  only.
Pippin 
stopped.
‘Well?’  said  Strider,  when  he  reappeared.
‘And  that,  Frodo,  is  the  end  of  my  account.
Why  didn’t  you  make  me  throw  it  away,  or,  or  destroy  it?’ 

‘Let  you?
The  conversation  in  The  Green 
Dragon  at  Bywater,  one  evening  in  the  spring  of  Frodo’s 
fiftieth  year,  showed  that  even  in  the  comfortable  heart  of  the 
Shire  rumours  had  been  heard,  though  most  hobbits  still 
laughed  at  them.
‘Wolves  won’t  get  him.
He  weighed  the  Ring  in  his  hand,  hesitating,  and 


8o 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


forcing  himself  to  remember  all  that  Gandalf  had  told  him; 
and  then  with  an  effort  of  will  he  made  a  movement,  as  if  to 
cast  it  away  -  but  he  found  that  he  had  put  it  back  in  his 
pocket.
Called, 
I  say,  though  I  have  not  called  you  to  me,  strangers  from 
distant  lands.
But  Isildur  would  not 
listen  to  our  counsel.
Don’t  adventures  ever  have  an  end?
And  they  added  also  coils 
of  rope,  three  to  each  boat.
But  before  you  go,  I  have  brought 
in  my  ship  gifts  which  the  Lord  and  Lady  of  the  Galadhrim 
now  offer  you  in  memory  of  Lothlorien.’  Then  she  called  to 
each  in  turn.
There  like  jewels  sunk  in  the  deep  shone  glinting 
stars,  though  sunlight  was  in  the  sky  above.
He  has  long  studied  it,  seeking  the  lost  secrets  of 
their  making;  but  when  the  Rings  were  debated  in  the  Coun¬ 
cil,  all  that  he  would  reveal  to  us  of  his  ring-lore  told  against 
my  fears.
Small,  but  great  in 
mischief.
I  will  do  what  I  can  -  but  all  the  more  do  I  urge 
you  now  to  go  on  without  rest.’ 

He  searched  the  wound  on  Frodo’s  shoulder  with  his 
fingers,  and  his  face  grew  graver,  as  if  what  he  learned  dis¬ 
quieted  him.
‘Foiled  again!’  he  said  to  his  wife.
Often  the  wizard  consulted  him 
at  points  where  the  choice  of  way  was  doubtful;  but  it  was 
always  Gandalf  who  had  the  final  word.
It  has  been  so  growing  on 
my  mind  lately.
At  his  side  Pippin  lay  dreaming  pleasantly;  but  a  change 
came  over  his  dreams  and  he  turned  and  groaned.
He  made  no  answer,  he  was  gazing 
intently  at  the  sky;  but  before  long  Sam  could  see  for  himself 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


371 


what  was  approaching.
The  Seven  are  lost  to  us  -  if 
Balin  has  not  found  the  ring  of  Thror,  which  was  the  last; 
naught  has  been  heard  of  it  since  Thror  perished  in  Moria.
Tom’s  in  a  hurry  now.
Sam  lay  rolled  in  blankets  beside  Frodo.
There  is  such  a  thing  as  malice  and 
revenge.’ 

‘Revenge?’  said  Frodo.
They  passed  Buck  Hill  and  Brandy 
Hall  on  their  left,  and  on  the  outskirts  of  Bucklebury  struck 
the  main  road  of  Buckland  that  ran  south  from  the  Bridge.
He  was  thinking  of  the  fabled 
Cracks  of  Doom  and  the  terror  of  the  Fiery  Mountain.
‘At  least  none 
can  foretell  what  will  come  to  pass,  if  we  take  this  road  or 
that.
Merry  nodded.
He  found  he 
could  hide  from  daylight  and  moonshine,  and  make  his  way 
swiftly  and  softly  by  dead  of  night  with  his  pale  cold  eyes, 
and  catch  small  frightened  or  unwary  things.
Do  not  repent 
of  your  welcome  to  the  Dwarf.
‘I  would  have 
stopped  your  going  into  the  common-room,  if  I  could;  but 
the  innkeeper  would  not  let  me  in  to  see  you,  or  take  a 
message.’ 

‘Do  you  think  he - ’  began  Frodo.
Have  you  thought  of  an  ending?’ 

‘Yes,  several,  and  all  are  dark  and  unpleasant,’  said  Frodo.
Now  tell  us  where  he  is;  for  I  much  desired  to 
speak  with  him  again.
Yet  who  knows?
Pippin  was  standing  studying  the  sky  and  weather.
It  was  an  old- 
fashioned  countrified  house,  as  much  like  a  hobbit-hole  as 
possible:  it  was  long  and  low,  with  no  upper  storey;  and  it 
had  a  roof  of  turf,  round  windows,  and  a  large  round  door.
Come  back!’ 

There  was  no  answer.
Frodo  leaned  back 
against  the  wall  and  took  off  the  Ring.
‘But  now  for 
a  merry  meeting!’  He  stretched  out  his  arms  and  whistled  a 
tune.
‘It  came  to  me  then,  as  if  I  was 
making  it  up;  but  I  may  have  heard  it  long  ago.
But  the  Ringwraiths 


292  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

themselves  cannot  be  so  easily  destroyed.
Its  key  is  gone  and  the  lock  is  broken,  and  it  opens  inwards.
‘Ah!
It  was  never  loud 
enough,  or  near  enough,  for  him  to  feel  certain  that  he  heard 
it;  but  once  it  had  started  it  never  stopped,  while  the  Company 
was  moving.
The  hobbits  grew  very  weary.
For  some  years  he  was  quite  happy  and  did  not  worry  much 
about  the  future.
You  must  make  up  your 
mind.
In  their  shed  they  found  the  ponies:  sturdy  little  beasts  of 
the  kind  loved  by  hobbits,  not  speedy,  but  good  for  a  long 
day’s  work.
Yesterday 
I  dreamed  that  my  task  was  done,  and  I  could  rest  here,  a 
long  while,  perhaps  for  good.’ 

‘I  don’t  wonder,’  said  Merry,  ‘and  I  wish  you  could.
‘If  only  that  dratted  wizard  will  leave  young  Frodo  alone, 
perhaps  he’ll  settle  down  and  grow  some  hobbit-sense,’  they 
said.
‘I  don’t  see  how  our  food  can  be  made  to  last,’  said  Frodo.
‘There  was  something  in  this  tree  that 
I  have  never  seen  before,’  he  said.
‘But  they  say  also  that 
you  need  have  no  fear.
It  is  a  long 
climb  for  those  that  are  not  accustomed  to  such  stairs,  but 
you  may  rest  upon  the  way.’ 

As  he  climbed  slowly  up  Frodo  passed  many  flets:  some 
on  one  side,  some  on  another,  and  some  set  about  the  bole 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL  461 

of  the  tree,  so  that  the  ladder  passed  through  them.
You  are 
indeed  high  in  the  favour  of  the  Lady!
Stars  were 
reflected  in  it.
I  could 
not  hear  what  was  said;  they  seemed  to  be  talking  in  their 
own  hideous  language.
‘The 
time  has  come.
Everything  seemed  quiet  and  peaceful,  just  an  ordinary 
corner  of  the  Shire.
‘You  don’t  know?
His  left  arm  was  lifeless,  and  his  side  and  shoulder 
felt  as  if  icy  claws  were  laid  upon  them.
‘I  mean,  they  seem 
usually  to  have  used  their  noses  rather  than  their  eyes, 


248 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


smelling  for  us,  if  smelling  is  the  right  word,  at  least  in  the 
daylight.
Did  not  Gandalf 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL 


Ml 


tell  you  that  the  rings  give  power  according  to  the  measure 
of  each  possessor?
For  these  things  are  given 
to  serve  you  when  all  else  fails.
He  must  have  taken  it  away.’ 

‘Well,  as  I  was  saying,’  Merry  proceeded,  ‘I  kept  my  know¬ 
ledge  to  myself,  till  this  spring  when  things  got  serious.
And  also  the  Ring  drew  them.
You  were  head  of  the  Council,  but  you  have  unmasked 
yourself  at  last.
Dig 
deep!
You  know  what  I  mean!
In  breadth  it  looked  to  be  no  more  than 
two  or  three  furlongs  at  the  widest  point.
When  Frodo  replied 
that  only  the  things  specially  directed  by  Bilbo  were  being 
given  away,  they  said  the  whole  affair  was  very  fishy.
We  might  do  better  in  the  sunlight.
He  thought  a  fire  was 
heating  his  toes,  and  out  of  the  shadows  on  the  other  side  of 
the  hearth  he  heard  Bilbo’s  voice  speaking.
So  they  came 
under  the  care  of  Tom  Bombadil  for  a  while,  and  were  well- 
off.
For  LOBELIA  SACKVTI J E-BAGGTNS,  as  a  PRESENT, 
on  a  case  of  silver  spoons.
The  ostler  has  a  tipsy  cat 

that  plays  a  five-stringed  fiddle; 

And  np  and  down  he  runs  his  bow, 

Now  squeaking  high,  now  purring  low, 
now  sawing  in  the  middle.
‘It  was  the  Sackville-Bagginses  that  were  his  downfall,  as  you 
might  expect.
He  wondered  if  there  were  willow-trees  close  to  the  house; 
and  then  suddenly  he  had  a  dreadful  feeling  that  he  was  not 
in  an  ordinary  house  at  all,  but  inside  the  willow  and  listening 
to  that  horrible  dry  creaking  voice  laughing  at  him  again.
Fear  no  grey  willow!’  And  with  that  he  took 
down  the  lamp  and  blew  it  out,  and  grasping  a  candle  in 
either  hand  he  led  them  out  of  the  room.
How  that  was  contrived  we  cannot  guess;  but 
Gollum  is  cunning,  and  the  spies  of  the  Enemy  are  many.
‘Put  it  on  the 
mantelpiece.
The  leaves 
were  all  thicker  and  greener  about  the  edges  of  the  glade, 
enclosing  it  with  an  almost  solid  wall.
I  wonder 
why.
“I  have  given  you  a  present 
already,  more  than  I  could  afford.
He  wore  a  ring  on  his  finger.
With  Dwarf  and  Hobbit,  Elves  and  Men, 
with  mortal  and  immortal  folk, 
with  bird  on  bough  and  beast  in  den, 
in  their  own  secret  tongues  he  spoke.
Light  goes  the  weather-wind  and  the  feathered  starling.
After  a 
moment  he  looked  up  with  relief.
Bilbo  Baggins  called  it  a  party,  but  it  was  really  a  variety 
of  entertainments  rolled  into  one.
They  halted  and  crowded 
anxiously  together.
‘Speak  no 
secrets!
Behind  the  dwarf  walked  Frodo,  and  he  had  drawn  the  short 
sword,  Sting.
You’ll  be  last  either  way,  Master  Peregrin.’ 

‘Trust  me  to  arrange  things  better  than  that!’  said  Merry.
But  I 
would  not  lead  you  into  Moria  if  there  were  no  hope  of 
coming  out  again.
‘In  the  North  after  the  war  and  the  slaughter  of  the  Gladden 
Fields  the  Men  of  Westernesse  were  diminished,  and  their 
city  of  Annuminas  beside  Lake  Evendim  fell  into  ruin;  and 
the  heirs  of  Valandil  removed  and  dwelt  at  Fornost  on  the 
high  North  Downs,  and  that  now  too  is  desolate.
All  at  once,  as  if  through  a  gate  of  light,  the  Road  ran  out 
again  from  the  end  of  the  tunnel  into  the  open.
He  got  up  and  crawled  to  the  opening 
and  peered  down.
It  was  a  harmless  enough  tale  for  most 
of  the  local  hobbits,  no  doubt:  just  a  funny  story  about  those 
funny  people  away  beyond  the  River;  but  some  (old 
Butterbur,  for  instance)  knew  a  thing  or  two,  and  had  prob¬ 
ably  heard  rumours  long  ago  about  Bilbo’s  vanishing.
Put  it  out!’  begged  Merry.
For  your  heart  was  not  touched,  and 
only  your  shoulder  was  pierced;  and  that  was  because  you 
resisted  to  the  last.
‘All  alone  and  without  me  to  help  you?
‘But  that  does  not 
make  what  you  say  untrue.
You  are  kindly  hosts!’ 


482  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

‘All  the  same,  we  bid  you  spare  the  food,’  they  said.
May  it  be  a  sign  that  though  the 


462  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

world  is  now  dark  better  days  are  at  hand,  and  that  friendship 
shall  be  renewed  between  our  peoples.’  Gimli  bowed  low.
That  was  an  insult,  if  you  like,’ 
said  Frodo  as  he  shut  the  door  on  her.
Make  it  tomorrow,  he  says,  and  then 
he  gave  me  a  letter.
Then  faintly,  as  if  it  was  blown  away  from  them  by  the  breeze, 
they  seemed  to  catch  a  dim  ringing,  as  of  small  bells  tinkling.
‘Yes,’  said  Frodo;  ‘but  whatever  came  into  my  mind  then 
I  will  keep  there.’ 

‘Well,  have  a  care!’  said  Boromir.
Butterbur,  looking  suspiciously  at  Strider.
But  they  should  serve  you  well:  they  are  light  to  wear,  and 
warm  enough  or  cool  enough  at  need.
The  air  came  fresh  from  the  North¬ 
west.
The  face  of  Elrond  was  ageless,  neither  old  nor  young, 
though  in  it  was  written  the  memory  of  many  things  both 
glad  and  sorrowful.
But  if  you  mean  to  help 
me,  I  ought  to  warn  you  that  you  will  be  in  danger  as  long  as 
I  am  in  your  house.
Quickly  they  gathered  dry  grass  and  leaves,  and  bits  of 
bark;  and  made  a  pile  of  broken  twigs  and  chopped  sticks.
There  is  no  descent  save  by  a  narrow  stair 
of  many  thousand  steps,  and  the  valley  below  seems  far  away.
To 
their  left  they  could  see  some  of  the  houses  and  hobbit-holes 
of  Staddle  on  the  gentler  south-eastern  slopes  of  the  hill; 
down  in  a  deep  hollow  away  north  of  the  Road  there  were 
wisps  of  rising  smoke  that  showed  where  Combe  lay;  Archet 
was  hidden  in  the  trees  beyond.
‘Take  you  to  see  Elves,  eh?’  he  said,  eyeing 
Sam  closely,  but  with  a  smile  flickering  on  his  face.
‘One  of  you  might  have  fallen  in  and  still  be  wondering 
when  you  were  going  to  strike  the  bottom,’  said  Aragorn  to 
Merry.
‘But  I  hope  that  you  may  find  some 
other  better  keeper  soon.
‘Take  it!’  Frodo  received  it 
on  his  shrinking  palm:  it  seemed  to  have  become  thicker  and 
heavier  than  ever.
He  became  sharp-eyed  and 
keen-eared  for  all  that  was  hurtful.
Chapter  2 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


The  talk  did  not  die  down  in  nine  or  even  ninety-nine  days.
Hours,  I  should  think.’  He  hesitated.
Through  Evernight  he  back  was  borne 
on  black  and  roaring  waves  that  ran 
o’er  leagues  unlit  and  foundered  shores 
that  drowned  before  the  Days  began, 
until  he  heard  on  strands  of  pearl 
where  ends  the  world  the  music  long, 
where  ever-foaming  billows  roll 
the  yellow  gold  and  jewels  wan.
“Nazgul,”  he  whispered.
“You’ll  go  back  where  you 
belong,  double  quick.
There  are  many 
strange  men  on  the  roads.
‘When  we  left  the  pass  I  led  you  southwards,  and  not  back 
to  our  starting  point,  as  some  of  you  may  have  noticed.
‘We  shall  pass  them  soon.
But  I  didn’t  keep 
it  back  a-purpose.
‘And  well  he  may.
Like  a  dream  the  vision 
shifted  and  went  back,  and  he  saw  the  trees  again.
Take  your  greedy  hands 
away,  and  I’ll  serve  them.’ 

Hobbits  have  a  passion  for  mushrooms,  surpassing  even 
the  greediest  likings  of  Big  People.
‘Enter,  good  guests!’  she  said,  and  as  she  spoke  they  knew 
that  it  was  her  clear  voice  they  had  heard  singing.
Too  seldom  do  my  kindred 
journey  hither  from  the  North.’ 

‘Welcome  Gimli  son  of  Gloin!
‘If  I  am  still  to  lead  this  Company, 
you  must  do  as  I  bid.
Gurgling  he  went  under,  and  the  River 
closed  over  his  curly  head.
If  you  come  soon  you’ll  find 
breakfast  on  the  table.
They  set  a  watch,  but  had  no 
sight  nor  sound  of  their  enemies.
Come  along!
Something  was  coming  up 
behind  them.
‘I  shall  get  myself  a  bit  into  training,  too,’  he  said,  looking 


90 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


at  himself  in  a  dusty  mirror  in  the  half-empty  hall.
‘Surely  you  see  it,  my  friend?’  he  said,  turning  now  sud¬ 
denly  to  Frodo  again.
Gil-galad  is  Starlight  in  their  tongue.
‘If  you  want  to  know,  I  felt  as  if  I  hadn’t  got  nothing 
on,  and  I  didn’t  like  it.
You  have  only  waited  your  chance  to  leave  us 
in  the  lurch.
Fennas  nogothrim,  lasto  heth  lammen!
Legolas  laid  down  his  paddle  and  took  up  the  bow  that  he 
had  brought  from  Lorien.
‘Perhaps  I  know  more  about  these  pursuers  than 
you  do.
On  its  top  stood  the  figure  of  a  man.
The  other  hobbits  agreed  hopefully 
that  it  did  not,  but  they  all  remained  full  of  suspicion.
During  the  next  year  or  two  he  had 
turned  up  fairly  often,  coming  unexpectedly  after  dusk,  and 
going  off  without  warning  before  sunrise.
Hun¬ 
dreds  of  musical  crackers  had  been  pulled.
‘Look!’  he  said,  clutching  Frodo  by  the  arm.
Not  far 
down  the  bank  Strider  pointed  out  a  stone  in  the  grass.
I  am 
afraid  we  shall  have  to  try  to  get  one  pony  at  least.
The 
Misty  Mountains  were  crawling  like  anthills:  ores  were  issuing 
out  of  a  thousand  holes.
There  was  no  reply.
The  Road  is 
watched,  but  we  should  have  to  cross  it,  if  we  tried  to  take 
cover  in  the  thickets  away  to  the  south.
But  we  have  not  yet  come  any 
nearer  to  our  purpose.
There  were  many  recesses  cut  in  the  rock  of  the  walls,  and 
in  them  were  large  iron-bound  chests  of  wood.
At  any 
rate  it  gave  him  no  inspiration.
What’s  the  good  of  Minas  Tirith 
anyway?
‘But  I  rode  to  the  foot  of  Orthanc,  and  came  to  the  stair  of 
Saruman;  and  there  he  met  me  and  led  me  up  to  his  high 
chamber.
There  he  stood,  with  his  hat  in  his  hand  and  the  wind  in 
his  hair,  and  looked  down  upon  the  three  hobbits,  that  had 
been  laid  on  their  backs  upon  the  grass  at  the  west  side  of 
the  mound.
Sam  thought  they  were  a  kind 
of  crow  of  large  size.
‘And  I  say  there’s  some  mistake,’  repeated  Butterbur, 
picking  up  the  tray  and  gathering  up  the  broken  crockery.
Come!
Out  of  the  Gates  they  ran  and  sprang  down 
the  huge  and  age -worn  steps,  the  threshold  of  Moria.
Two  hundred 
steps  they  counted,  broad  and  shallow;  and  at  the  top  they 
found  an  arched  passage  with  a  level  floor  leading  on  into  the 
dark.
They  had  not  gone 
far  before  the  sun  sank  behind  the  westward  heights  and  great 
shadows  crept  down  the  mountain-sides.
His  legs  began  to  luck.
Come  now,  my  merry 
friends,  and  Tom  will  refresh  you!
‘  “I  liked  white  better,”  I  said.
A  shrill  cry  rang  out  in  the  night;  and  he  felt  a  pain  like  a  dart 
of  poisoned  ice  pierce  his  left  shoulder.
Before  they  had  finished  breakfast  the  clouds  had  joined  into 
an  unbroken  roof,  and  a  straight  grey  rain  came  softly  and 
steadily  down.
As  for  your  other  question:  do 
you  doubt  my  tale?
He  will  not  go  astray 
-  if  there  is  any  path  to  find.
And  by 
what  shall  I  steer?
Who 
knows  what  you  will  find  there,  if  ever  you  return?’ 

‘Not  this  at  least,’  said  Boromir,  ‘that  they  will  buy  their 
lives  with  horses.
‘If  ever  such  a  tale  was  told  in 
the  South,  it  has  long  been  forgotten.
‘I 
don’t  know  what  to  think,’  he  said  at  last.
Lobelia  knew  that  quite  well.
For  even  the  very  wise  cannot  see  all  ends.
The  Bree-folk  used  to 
be  fair-spoken  to  travellers,  or  so  I  had  heard.’ 

‘All  right,  all  right!’  said  the  man.
Aragorn  stayed  his  boat  as  the  Swan-ship  drew  alongside.
Sam  and  Strider  came 
behind,  one  on  each  side  of  Frodo’s  pony,  for  the  path  was 
now  broad  enough  for  four  or  five  hobbits  to  walk  abreast.
It  seemed  to 
have  been  scooped  in  the  river-side,  not  by  hand,  but  by  the 
water  swirling  down  from  Sarn  Gebir  against  a  low  pier  of 
rock  that  jutted  out  some  way  into  the  stream.
As  long  as  they  could 
they  avoided  climbing  for  Frodo’s  sake,  and  because  it  was 
in  fact  difficult  to  find  any  way  up  out  of  the  narrow  dales.
What  you  will  see,  if  you  leave  the  Mirror  free  to 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL 


471 


work,  I  cannot  tell.
They 
dreaded  the  dark  hours,  and  kept  watch  in  pairs  by  night, 
expecting  at  any  time  to  see  black  shapes  stalking  in  the 
grey  night,  dimly  lit  by  the  cloud-veiled  moon;  but  they  saw 
nothing,  and  heard  no  sound  but  the  sigh  of  withered  leaves 
and  grass.
But  we  are  high 
up,  a  good  deal  higher  than  the  Dimrill  Gate,  unless  I  am 
mistaken.
He  could  not  be 
quite  sure,  but  it  seemed  to  him  that  suddenly,  before  it 
passed  out  of  sight,  the  horse  turned  aside  and  went  into  the 
trees  on  the  right.
Over  them  was  a  lane  of  pale-blue  sky, 
around  them  the  dark  overshadowed  River,  and  before  them 
black,  shutting  out  the  sun,  the  hills  of  Emyn  Muil,  in  which 
no  opening  could  be  seen.
Moved  by  a  sudden 
impulse  he  groped  for  a  loose  stone,  and  let  it  drop.
THREE  IS  COMPANY 


93 


They  went  in  single  file  along  hedgerows  and  the  borders  of 
coppices,  and  night  fell  dark  about  them.
At  its  feet  was  a 
wide  space  of  grass  and  reeds;  and  in  the  distance  could  be 
glimpsed  another  bank  almost  as  steep.
He  rushed  back  to  the  bank.
I  do  not  ask  for  such  a  gift.
They  had  heard  this  and 
other  darker  rumours  before,  of  course;  but  hobbits  have  a 
passion  for  family  history,  and  they  were  ready  to  hear  it 
again.
‘Oh,  not  what  he  told  the  dwarves  and  put  in  his  book,’ 
said  Frodo.
The  tenth  day  of  their  journey  was  over.
Maggot!’  said  Pippin.
‘All  right,’  said  Sam,  laughing  with  the  rest.
Wonder  of  the  Northern 
world!
By  water,  wood  and  hill,  by  the  reed  and  willow, 

By  fire,  sun  and  moon,  harken  now  and  hear  us!
Legolas  had  a  bow  and  a  quiver,  and  at 
his  belt  a  long  white  knife.
I  mean  just  this:  I  will  tell  you  what 
I  know,  and  give  you  some  good  advice  -  but  I  shall  want  a 
reward.’ 

‘And  what  will  that  be,  pray?’  said  Frodo.
‘You  had  better  do  something  quick!’  whispered  Strider  in 
his  ear.
I  came  to  Buckland  and  found  it  in  uproar, 
as  busy  as  a  hive  of  ants  that  has  been  stirred  with  a  stick.
O  spring-time  and  summer-time,  and  spring  again  after!
Only  from  Rohan  now  will  any  men 
ride  to  us  when  we  call.
He  seemed  to  be  in  a  world  of 
mist  in  which  there  were  only  shadows:  the  Ring  was  upon 
him.
I  cannot  sleep  on  a  perch!’ 

‘Then  dig  a  hole  in  the  ground,’  said  Legolas,  ‘if  that  is  more 
after  the  fashion  of  your  kind.
You  have  not  told  me  all  concerning  yourself;  and  how 
then  shall  I  choose  better  than  you?
They  have  been  aware  of  us  for  a 
long  while.
Now  I  have  taken  my 
worst  wound  in  this  parting,  even  if  I  were  to  go  this  night 
straight  to  the  Dark  Lord.
‘Yet  I 
hope  very  much  that  before  we  leave  we  shall  see  the  Lady 
of  the  Elves  again.’ 

Even  as  he  spoke,  they  saw,  as  if  she  came  in  answer  to 
their  words,  the  Lady  Galadriel  approaching.
‘Here  the  Elven- 
way  from  Hollin  ended.
At  the  end 
of  the  hall  the  floor  vanished  and  fell  to  an  unknown  depth.
In  a  chair,  at  the  far  side  of  the  room  facing  the  outer 
door,  sat  a  woman.
‘Either  stop  where  we  are,  or  go  back,’  said  Gandalf.
‘The  rain  has  ended,’  she  said;  ‘and  new  waters  are  running 
downhill,  under  the  stars.
‘It’s  sunlight 
and  bright  day,  right  enough,’  he  said.
I  am  not  going  out 
of  the  way,  back  to  the  road  we  left  last  night:  I  am  going  to 
cut  straight  across  country  from  here.’ 

‘Then  you  are  going  to  fly,’  said  Pippin.
What  do  you  say  to  slipping  off  for  some 
more  quiet  talk?’ 

‘Can  we?’  said  Frodo.
‘Go  back!’  he  cried.
But  in  Moria  the  burden  of  Gandalf  had  been  laid 
on  him;  and  he  knew  that  he  could  not  now  forsake  the  Ring, 
if  Frodo  refused  in  the  end  to  go  with  Boromir.
Then  comes  We  have  taken  the  twentyfirst  hall 
of  North  end  to  dwell  in.
‘Well,  what  next?
That  is  a  chapter  of  ancient  history 
which  it  might  be  good  to  recall;  for  there  was  sorrow  then 
too,  and  gathering  dark,  but  great  valour,  and  great  deeds 
that  were  not  wholly  vain.
How  could  they  hope  to 
reach  Rivendell  on  foot,  pursued  by  mounted  enemies?
He 
looked  across  the  stream  to  the  road  that  led  back  to  Dimrill 
Dale,  and  then  up  into  the  roof  of  dark  boughs  above.
Now,  if  you’ll  excuse  me,  Mr.
As  well  set  your  boot  to  the  mountain’s  root, 

For  the  seat  of  a  troll  don’t  feel  it.
There  was  not  as  yet  any  sign  of  a  path,  and  the  trees 
seemed  constantly  to  bar  their  way.
‘Three  hobbits  in  a 


THREE  IS  COMPANY  105 

wood  at  night!
He  gave  a  cry  and  clutched  Strider’s  arm.
No,  I  can’t  give  no  message.
What  did  they  do  it  all  for?
The  opening  words  were  Elvish,  like 
the  writing  on  the  arch:  that  seems  certain.’ 

He  stepped  up  to  the  rock  again,  and  lightly  touched  with 
his  staff  the  silver  star  in  the  middle  beneath  the  sign  of  the 
anvil.
He’s  welcome  to  go  where  he  will, 
so  long  as  he  pays  in  the  morning.
Seldom 
have  we  had  such  delight  in  strangers,  and  it  is  fair  to  hear 
words  of  the  Ancient  Speech  from  the  lips  of  other  wanderers 
in  the  world.’ 

Frodo  felt  sleep  coming  upon  him,  even  as  Gildor  finished 
speaking.
You’ll  get  lost.
‘Eat 
little  at  a  time,  and  only  at  need.
But  this  in  the  Common  Tongue  is  what 
is  said,  close  enough: 

One  Ring  to  rule  them  all.
After  me!’ 

He  turned  left  and  sped  across  the  smooth  floor  of  the  hall.
‘I  should  like  to  learn  it.
Sam  and  Merry  got  up  and  walked  away  from  the  fire.
Why  don’t 
you  keep  up?’ 

There  was  no  answer.
Frodo  guessed  that  they  were  now  in  the  same 
region,  and  wondered  if  by  chance  they  would  pass  near 
the  spot.
The  current  was  swift  and  they  went  forward 
slowly.
‘I  did  not 
know  that  we  had  come  so  far:  Anduin  flows  faster  than  I 
thought.
Lamps  were  twinkling 
there.
The 
leaves  seemed  to  hiss  above  their  heads  with  a  sound  of  pain 
and  anger.
Consider  Saruman.
One  of  the  Bree- 
landers,  who  seemed  to  have  been  in  the  Shire  several  times, 
wanted  to  know  where  the  Underhills  lived  and  who  they 
were  related  to.
Into  what  deadly  perils  he  had  gone  alone  I  dared 
not  guess.’ 

‘There  is  little  need  to  tell  of  them,’  said  Aragorn.
Frodo  was  annoyed.
Take  care  of  yourself!
Aragorn  with  Merry  came 
behind.
At  that  moment  there  was  a  twang  of  bowstrings:  several 
arrows  whistled  over  them,  and  some  fell  among  them.
Soon  I  think  we  should  look 


426  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

for  a  left-hand  turn  to  take  us  east.
‘We  have  drunk  the  cup  of  parting,’  she  said,  ‘and  the 
shadows  fall  between  us.
‘  “Because  it’s  my  birthday,  my  love,  and  I  wants  it,”  said 
Smeagol.
‘Now  the  joy  that  was 
hidden  in  the  songs  we  heard  is  made  plain  to  me.
I  thought  it 
was  Lobelia.’ 

‘Then  I  forgive  you.
He  was  relieved.
‘You  do  not  ask  me  or  tell  me  much  that  concerns  yourself, 
Frodo,’  said  Gildor.
In  the  ruins  of  the  Dwarves,  a  dwarf’s  head  will  be  less  easy 
to  bewilder  than  Elves  or  Men  or  Hobbits.
Found  some 
friends  at  last?’  Strider  nodded,  but  did  not  answer.
The  pony  was  laden  instead 
with  a  great  part  of  the  others’  burdens,  so  that  they  now 
marched  lighter,  and  for  a  time  made  good  speed;  but  the 
hobbits  began  to  find  it  hard  to  keep  up  with  the  swift  tireless 
feet  of  the  Elf.
You’d  stop  them  digging  up  the  Gaffer  and  turning 
him  adrift.
‘Sam  Gamgee 
is  it?
At  first  their  choice  seemed  to  be  good:  they  got  along  at 
a  fair  speed,  though  whenever  they  got  a  glimpse  of  the  sun 
in  an  open  glade  they  seemed  unaccountably  to  have  veered 
eastwards.
Were  these  people  all  in  league 
against  him?
‘We  know  many  things,’  they  said.
Behind  them  the 
great  cracks  gaped  wide  to  receive  them  as  the  tree  swayed 
and  creaked.
‘What  an  evil  fortune!
‘Come  along  now!
A  music  came  down  the  river  as  it 
drew  nearer;  and  suddenly  they  perceived  that  it  was  a  ship, 
wrought  and  carved  with  elven-skill  in  the  likeness  of  a  bird.
He  was  liable  to  drag  in  bits 
of  what  he  called  poetry;  and  sometimes,  after  a  glass  or 
two,  would  allude  to  the  absurd  adventures  of  his  mysterious 
journey.
‘Yes,  the  Ring,’  said  Merry.
More  promising  still  (to  the  hobbits’  mind):  an  enormous 
open-air  kitchen  was  erected  in  the  north  corner  of  the  field.
‘You  are  a  set  of  deceitful  scoundrels!’  he  said,  turning  to 
the  others.
‘Swans!’  said  Sam.
They  felt  the  ground  beneath  their  feet  smooth  and 
soft,  and  after  a  while  they  walked  more  freely,  without  fear 
of  hurt  or  fall.
Strider  withdrew  into  a  dark  corner.
At  first  he  could  see  little.
He  might  do  so,  if  all  the 
free  folk  of  the  world  begged  him,  but  he  would  not  under¬ 
stand  the  need.
‘But  I  guess  he  knows  we  came  down  it.
‘But  you  won’t  get  it.
Heal  it!
The  Eye  was  rimmed  with  fire,  but  was 
itself  glazed,  yellow  as  a  cat’s,  watchful  and  intent,  and  the 
black  slit  of  its  pupil  opened  on  a  pit,  a  window  into  nothing.
He  wondered  how  he  would  break  it  to  them.
Just  behind  them  a  large  branch  fell  from  an  old  overhanging 


148  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

tree  with  a  crash  into  the  path.
It  was  not  the  dawn,  for  that 
was  still  some  hours  off.
For  a  moment  the  ores  quailed  and  the  fiery 
shadow  halted.
Mountains  loomed  dark  in  the  distance 
against  a  pale  sky.
‘I  was  lulled  by  the  words 
of  Saruman  the  Wise;  but  I  should  have  sought  for  the  truth 
sooner,  and  our  peril  would  now  be  less.’ 

We  were  all  at  fault,’  said  Elrond,  ‘and  but  for  your  vigil¬ 
ance  the  Darkness,  maybe,  would  already  be  upon  us.
Strange  furtive  noises  ran 
among  the  bushes  and  reeds  on  either  side  of  them;  and  if 
they  looked  up  to  the  pale  sky,  they  caught  sight  of  queer 
gnarled  and  knobbly  faces  that  gloomed  dark  against  the 
twilight,  and  leered  down  at  them  from  the  high  bank  and 
the  edges  of  the  wood.
The  counter-spell  was  terrible.
The  sun  was  now  high,  and  it  shone  down  through  the 
half-stripped  branches  of  the  trees,  and  lit  the  clearing  with 
bright  patches  of  light.
I  shall  go,  unless  they  chain  me 
up.
We  might  labour  far  upstream  and  yet  miss  it  in  the  fog.
Gandalf  now  pressed  on  at  a  great  pace,  and  the  others 
followed  as  quickly  as  they  could.
“And  he  that 
breaks  a  thing  to  find  out  what  it  is  has  left  the  path  of 
wisdom.” 

‘  “You  need  not  speak  to  me  as  to  one  of  the  fools  that  you 
take  for  friends,”  said  he.
‘So  all  my  plan  is  spoilt!’  said  Frodo.
‘Run  down  with  this  to  your  home,  Sam!’  he  said.
‘Help!’  cried  Frodo  and  Sam  running  towards  him  with 
their  hands  stretched  out.
Again  Gandalf  approached  the  wall,  and  lifting  up  his  arms 
he  spoke  in  tones  of  command  and  rising  wrath.
The 
sun  was  not,  however,  high  enough  yet  to  shine  down  into 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


147 


the  clearing,  though  its  light  was  on  the  tree-tops.
The  Mirror  is  dangerous  as 
a  guide  of  deeds.’ 

Sam  sat  on  the  ground  and  put  his  head  in  his  hands.
There  hammer  on  the  anvil  smote, 

There  chisel  clove,  and  graver  wrote ; 

There  forged  was  blade,  and  bound  was  hilt; 
The  delver  mined,  the  mason  built.
Enter  the 
boats!
It  is 
dangerous  and  narrow.’ 

Suddenly  Frodo  saw  before  him  a  black  chasm.
Slowly  the  fire  died  till  nothing  was  left  but  falling  ash  and 
sparks;  a  bitter  smoke  curled  above  the  burned  tree-stumps, 
and  blew  darkly  from  the  hill,  as  the  first  light  of  dawn  came 
dimly  in  the  sky.
And  if  we  are  careful  that 
will  be  hard  to  find.
‘But  there  is  another 
way,  and  not  by  the  pass  of  Caradhras:  the  dark  and  secret 
way  that  we  have  spoken  of.’ 

‘But  let  us  not  speak  of  it  again!
In  the  wavering  firelight  Gandalf  seemed  suddenly  to  grow: 
he  rose  up,  a  great  menacing  shape  like  the  monument  of 
some  ancient  king  of  stone  set  upon  a  hill.
He 
appeared  to  have  done  nothing.
But  I  was  not  here  then.
You  can  trust  the  landlord  (Butterbur).
‘Oh,  Mr.
‘Of  course,  my  dear  Frodo,  it  was  dangerous  for  you;  and 
that  has  troubled  me  deeply.
He  was  lying  by  the  fire,  which  was  now  piled 
high  and  burning  brightly.
And  there  will  be  many  Elves  hidden  on  the  northern 
border  before  another  night  falls.
Come  now,  Frodo,  tell  us  what  you  are  doing?
As  I 
knew  he  was  at  your  side,  I  went  away  on  a  journey  of  my 
own.
He  listened  anxiously.
We  have  failed  to  recapture  Gollum.
Each  cloak  was  fastened  about 
the  neck  with  a  brooch  like  a  green  leaf  veined  with  silver.
‘Welcome  and  well  met!’  said  the  dwarf,  turning  towards 
him.
‘And  why  haven’t 
I  been  allowed  to  see  you  before?’ 

‘Because  you  were  asleep.
BOOK  TWO 


Chapter  I 


MANY  MEETINGS 


Frodo  woke  and  found  himself  lying  in  bed.
I  have  only  once  or  twice 
been  in  here  after  dark,  and  then  only  near  the  hedge.
‘This  has  been  handled  recently,’  he  said.
Two  or  three  weeks  had  passed,  and  still  Frodo 
made  no  sign  of  getting  ready  to  go.
It  was  empty  and  silent,  and  hardly  a  trickle  of  water 
flowed  among  the  brown  and  red-stained  stones  of  its  bed; 


392 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


but  on  the  near  side  there  was  a  path,  much  broken  and 
decayed,  that  wound  its  way  among  the  ruined  walls  and 
paving-stones  of  an  ancient  highroad.
Butterbur  was  called 
away  by  a  demand  for  more  ale  and  his  last  remark  remained 
unexplained.
The  fog  rolled  up  to 
the  walls  and  rose  above  them,  and  as  it  mounted  it  bent  over 
their  heads  until  it  became  a  roof:  they  were  shut  in  a  hall  of 
mist  whose  central  pillar  was  the  standing  stone.
‘My  dear  Frodo!’  exclaimed  Gandalf.
They 
were  now  on  level  ground,  and  the  road  after  much  winding 
lay  straight  ahead  through  grass-land  sprinkled  with  tall  trees, 
outliers  of  the  approaching  woods.
If  I  hadn’t  a  guessed 
right,  where  would  you  be  now?’ 

‘Safely  on  my  way.’ 

‘Safely!’  said  Sam.
I’ll  take  a  walk,  I  think, 
and  look  at  the  stars  of  Elbereth  in  the  garden.
awake!
Suddenly  something  caught  his 
sight:  at  first  he  stared  at  it  listlessly,  then  he  sat  up  and 
rubbed  his  eyes;  but  when  he  looked  again  he  could  not  see 
it  any  more.
Sam  stared  up  at  the  inn  with 
its  three  storeys  and  many  windows,  and  felt  his  heart  sink.
I  couldn’t  hear  a  word  that  was  said.
Have  you  got  it,  Frodo?’ 

‘No.
But  you 


352 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


know  well  enough  now  that  starting  is  too  great  a  claim  for 
any,  and  that  only  a  small  part  is  played  in  great  deeds  by 
any  hero.
Where  is  that  silly  fellow,  Merry?
‘Hobbits!’  he  cried.
We  must  hurry  on.
But  just 
you  up  and  answer  his  questions  straight  away!’ 

Well,  sir,’  said  Sam  dithering  a  little.
‘But  this  fellow  was  the  most  outlandish  I  have  ever 
set  eyes  on.
To  his  surprise 
Frodo  saw  that  Aragorn  stood  beside  her;  his  dark  cloak  was 


3io 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


thrown  back,  and  he  seemed  to  be  clad  in  elven-mail,  and  a 
star  shone  on  his  breast.
If  you 
would  let  me  choose,  then  I  should  appoint  three  com¬ 
panions:  Sam,  who  could  not  bear  it  otherwise;  and  Gimli; 
and  myself.
It  is  fashioned  in  an  elven-script  of  Eregion,  for  they 
have  no  letters  in  Mordor  for  such  subtle  work;  but  the 
language  is  unknown  to  me.
‘About  their 
origins,  at  any  rate,  I  know  more  than  hobbits  do  themselves.
‘You  have  shown 
your  usual  cunning  in  getting  up  just  in  time  for  a  meal.’ 


MANY  MEETINGS 


295 


‘More  than  a  meal!
And  I  listen  and  I  think.
In  this  way  the  time 
passed  without  event  until  the  seventh  day.
Of  course  the  Enemy  has  other  servants,  but  they 
will  have  to  journey  all  the  way  to  the  borders  of  Rivendell 
before  they  can  pick  up  our  trail.
And  we  must  find  the 
path,  if  we  are  to  pass  Sarn  Gebir  and  come  to  the  Emyn 
Muil.’ 

‘I  do  not  see  why  we  should  pass  the  Rapids  or  follow  the 
River  any  further,’  said  Boromir.
He  heard  there  oft  the  flying  sound 
Of  feet  as  light  as  linden-leaves, 

Or  music  welling  underground, 

In  hidden  hollows  quavering.
‘It  is  clad  in  a  forest  of  dark  fir,  where  the  trees  strive 
one  against  another  and  their  branches  rot  and  wither.
Creeping  cautiously  out  from  the 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS  119 

edge  of  the  trees,  they  set  off  across  the  open  as  quickly  as 
they  could.
The  fearless,  the  ruthless,  these  alone  will  achieve  vic¬ 
tory.
Indeed  I  do  not  think  that  even  he  had  any  clear  purpose.’ 

‘Maybe  not,’  said  Celeborn,  ‘yet  when  you  leave  this  land, 
you  can  no  longer  forget  the  Great  River.
He  huddled  closer 
to  the  fire.
Eldest,  that’s  what  I  am.
Frodo  wondered 
vaguely  why  the  fact  that  they  did  not  come  on  up  the  Hill 
seemed  a  great  relief.
‘Eh,  what?’  said  he.
‘The  wolf  that  one  hears  is  worse  than  the  ore 
that  one  fears.’ 

‘True!’  said  Aragorn,  loosening  his  sword  in  its  sheath.
A  lord  of  wisdom  throned  he  sat, 
swift  in  anger,  quick  to  laugh; 
an  old  man  in  a  battered  hat 
who  leaned  upon  a  thorny  staff.
Stumps  and  dead  boughs  were  rotting  in  the  shallows,  the 
remains  it  seemed  of  old  thickets,  or  of  a  hedge  that  had  once 
lined  the  road  across  the  drowned  valley.
We  will  not  speak  more  of  it.
Thinbone!
Cast  off 
these  cold  rags!
The  advancing  hoofs 
stopped  short.
‘Are  you  still  willing  to  help  me?’ 

‘I  am,’  said  Mr.
‘Nine 
were  to  set  out:  so  said  the  messages.
So  Saruman  guessed,  and  he  had  concealed 
his  mind  and  deceived  his  messenger.
Well-preserved  indeed!’  he 
snorted.
I  went  down  to  West-gate,  and  then  back  up 
towards  South-gate.
‘I  shall  have  to  go.
But  if  you  mean  “known  about  this  ring”, 
well,  I  still  do  not  know ,  one  might  say.
Adelard  had  carried  off  many  unlabelled  ones.
The  waggon  seemed  slower 
than  a  snail  to  Frodo.
The  lodes  lead 
away  north  towards  Caradhras,  and  down  to  darkness.
But  in  the  spring  when  the 
wind  is  in  the  new  leaves  the  echo  of  her  voice  may  still  be 
heard  by  the  falls  that  bear  her  name.
Gold  was  piled  on  the  biers  of  dead 
kings  and  queens;  and  mounds  covered  them,  and  the  stone 
doors  were  shut;  and  the  grass  grew  over  all.
It  is 
too  great  a  matter  for  me.’ 

Galadriel  laughed  with  a  sudden  clear  laugh.
‘Moria!
An  hour,  maybe,  went  by,  though  it  seemed  far  longer, 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


381 


and  then  at  last  they  saw  Legolas  coming  back.
‘But  last  night  I  told  you  of  Sauron  the  Great,  the  Dark 
Lord.
‘You  should  have.
I  am 
very  weary.
Even  if  we  are  allowed  to  leave  Bree 
unhindered,  we  can  hardly  hope  now  to  leave  it  unnoticed.
He  was  relieved  when  Pippin 
confessed  what  he  had  done;  but  he  was  angry,  and  Pippin 
could  see  his  eye  glinting.
‘In  the  South  the  realm  of  Gondor  long  endured;  and  for 
a  while  its  splendour  grew,  recalling  somewhat  of  the  might 
of  Numenor,  ere  it  fell.
‘I  hope,  if  I  do  go  to 
sleep  in  this  bird-loft,  that  I  shan’t  roll  off,’  he  said.
For  many 
minutes  he  stood  looking  down  at  them  with  a  smile.
Together  we  score  one  hundred  and  forty-four.
Do 
not  travel  by  night!
‘He 
has  no  more  doubts  now.’ 

‘I  am  glad,’  said  Frodo.
The  stars  shone 
through  the  window  and  the  silence  of  the  heavens  seemed 


172 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


to  be  round  him.
His  knees  gave, 
and  he  fell  on  the  ground.
Elrond 
is  far  away,  and  darkness  gathers  between  us,  and  all  this  year 
the  shadows  have  grown  longer.’ 

‘Nay,  there  was  no  change  of  counsel,’  said  the  Lady 
Galadriel,  speaking  for  the  first  time.
A  song!’  shouted  all  the 
others.
412 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


The  world  was  fair,  the  mountains  tall, 

In  Elder  Days  before  the  fall 
Of  mighty  kings  in  Nargothrond 
And  Gondolin,  who  now  beyond 
The  Western  Seas  have  passed  away: 

The  world  was  fair  in  Durin’s  Day.
‘Behold  Tol  Brandir!’  said  Aragorn,  pointing  south  to  the 
tall  peak.
And  then  again  a  ship  with  black  sails,  but  now  it  was 
morning  again,  and  the  water  rippled  with  light,  and  a  banner 
bearing  the  emblem  of  a  white  tree  shone  in  the  sun.
Against  it  the  old  allies  and  policies  will  not  avail  us  at 
all.
And  neither  strength  nor  wisdom  will 
carry  us  far  upon  it.
‘What  shall  we  look  for, 
and  what  shall  we  see?’  asked  Frodo,  filled  with  awe.
The  third  choice  is  to  stay 
here,  until  the  end.” 

‘  “Until  what  end?” 

‘  “Until  you  reveal  to  me  where  the  One  may  be  found.
The  Brandybucks  were  blowing  the  Horn-call  of  Buckland, 
that  had  not  been  sounded  for  a  hundred  years,  not  since  the 
white  wolves  came  in  the  Fell  Winter,  when  the  Brandywine 
was  frozen  over.
In  the  lane  the  noise  of 
hoofs  broke  out,  and  gathering  to  a  gallop,  went  hammering 
away  into  the  darkness.
On  this  occasion  the  presents  were  unusually  good.
What  is  it!’  cried  Merry.
Still  round  the  corner  there  may  wait 
A  new  road  or  a  secret  gate, 

And  though  we  pass  them  by  today.
’ 

For  a  while  the  hobbits  continued  to  talk  and  think  of  the 
past  journey  and  of  the  perils  that  lay  ahead;  but  such  was 
the  virtue  of  the  land  of  Rivendell  that  soon  all  fear  and 
anxiety  was  lifted  from  their  minds.
There  I  hope  we  may  meet  again.
Instead  each 
of  us  must  take  a  share  of  what  the  pony  carried,  especially 
the  food  and  the  water-skins.’ 

‘But  you  can’t  leave  poor  old  Bill  behind  in  this  forsaken 
place,  Mr.
He  had  a  long  white  beard  and  bushy  eyebrows 
that  stuck  out  beyond  the  brim  of  his  hat.
The 
affray  was  sharp,  but  the  ores  were  dismayed  by  the  fierceness 
of  the  defence.
For  he  believed  that  the  message  of  the  dreams  was 
a  summons,  and  that  the  hour  had  come  at  last  when  the  heir 
of  Elendil  should  come  forth  and  strive  with  Sauron  for  the 
mastery.
Old  Balin  had  gone  away.
It  looked  to  be  made  of  pure  and  solid 
gold.
He  told  me  that  his 
business  with  you  had  gone  well,  and  that  you  would  be 
starting  for  Rivendell  in  the  last  week  of  September.
‘And  now  leave  me  in  peace  for  a  bit!
Find  only  news  of  the  thief,  whether  he  still 
lives  and  where,  and  you  shall  have  great  reward  and  lasting 
friendship  from  the  Lord.
Frodo  and  Gimli  stand¬ 
ing  at  his  side  could  see,  as  he  gingerly  turned  the  leaves, 
that  they  were  written  by  many  different  hands,  in  runes, 
both  of  Moria  and  of  Dale,  and  here  and  there  in  Elvish 
script.
We  had  not  heard  of  -  hobbits,  of  halflings,  for 
many  a  long  year,  and  did  not  know  that  any  yet  dwelt  in 
Middle-earth.
I  do  not  deny  that  my  heart  has  greatly  desired  to 
ask  what  you  offer.
We 
might  spend  a  year  in  such  a  journey,  and  we  should  pass 
through  many  lands  that  are  empty  and  harbourless.
‘Can’t  we  go  and  see  them?’ 

‘Listen!
But  most  of  them 
had  natural  names,  such  as  Banks,  Brockhouse,  Longholes, 
Sandheaver,  and  Tunnelly,  many  of  which  were  used  in  the 
Shire.
‘It  is  a  name  of  ill  omen,’  said  Boromir.
Frodo  also  had  a  tussle  with 
young  Sancho  Proudfoot  (old  Odo  Proudfoot’s  grandson), 
who  had  begun  an  excavation  in  the  larger  pantry,  where  he 
thought  there  was  an  echo.
I  feel  that  as  long  as  the  Shire  lies  behind,  safe 
and  comfortable,  I  shall  find  wandering  more  bearable:  I  shall 
know  that  somewhere  there  is  a  firm  foothold,  even  if  my  feet 
cannot  stand  there  again.
But  now  I  don’t  know  what  he’ll  have  to  say  to  me,  if  I  see 
him  again:  turn  all  my  ale  sour  or  me  into  a  block  of  wood,  I 
shouldn’t  wonder.
Each 
time  they  climbed  down  they  found  the  hollow  filled  with  thick 
bushes  and  matted  undergrowth,  which  somehow  would  not 
yield  to  the  left,  but  only  gave  way  when  they  turned  to  the 
right;  and  they  had  to  go  some  distance  along  the  bottom 
before  they  could  find  a  way  up  the  further  bank.
What  are 
you  looking  for?
.
Very  well!
But  his  hope  soon  changed  to  bewil¬ 
derment  and  alarm.
Old 
Rory  Brandybuck,  in  return  for  much  hospitality,  got  a  dozen 
bottles  of  Old  Winyards:  a  strong  red  wine  from  the  South¬ 
farthing,  and  now  quite  mature,  as  it  had  been  laid  down  by 
Bilbo’s  father.
The  light 
was  no  longer  bright,  for  the  clear  morning  had  faded,  and 
clouds  creeping  out  of  the  East  had  now  overtaken  the  sun, 
as  it  began  to  go  down.
But  that  was  short  of  the  mark,  for  twenty 
guests  were  invited  and  there  were  several  meals  at  which  it 
snowed  food  and  rained  drink,  as  hobbits  say.
And  who  was  he?’  asked  Frodo  eagerly.
Then  climbing 
out  of  the  dell  they  took  to  the  road  again.
‘I  know  nothing  about  jools.
O  Queen  beyond  the  Western  Seas!
Doner!
The  travellers  huddled  in  their  boats  felt  the 
changing  of  the  weather.
One  summer’s  evening  an  astonishing  piece  of  news 
reached  the  Ivy  Bush  and  Green  Dragon.
Even  if  we  could  come  to  the  shores  of  the  Sea,  we  should 
find  no  longer  any  shelter  there.
We  shall 
see!’ 

Sam  choked  with  tears.
What  is  it?’  said  Frodo, 
still  shaken  and  bewildered.
When  he  looked  back  he  found 
that  he  was  alone:  the  others  had  not  followed  him.
‘Baggins  is  his  name,  but  he’s  more  than 
half  a  Brandybuck,  they  say.
And  I  am  already  weary.’ 

The  dark  figure  streaming  with  fire  raced  towards  them.
‘I  have  no  memory  of  this  place  at  all!’  said  Gandalf,  stand¬ 
ing  uncertainly  under  the  arch.
He  spoke  funny.
And  here  you  are,  and  trouble  is  not  far  off, 
seemingly.’ 

‘What  do  you  mean?’  asked  Frodo.
‘I  saw  him  there,’  answered  Gandalf,  ‘but  before  that  he 
had  wandered  far,  following  Bilbo’s  trail.
‘That  wouldn’t  be  much  use.’ 

‘Wait  a  minute!’  cried  Sam,  struck  by  an  idea  suggested  by 
firewood.
The  dogs  lay  by  the  fire 
and  gnawed  rinds  and  cracked  bones.
I  mean  he  is  dear  to 
me;  though  he  is  strange,  and  grim  at  times.
Be 
bold,  but  wary!
Frodo  halted  for  a  moment,  looking  back.
Yet  he  had  just  the  wit 
to  play  the  part  that  I  set  him.
One  river  at  a 
time!
They  shut  their 
eyes,  and  then  it  seemed  that  they  could  almost  hear  words, 
cool  words,  saying  something  about  water  and  sleep.
The  braids  of 
her  dark  hair  were  touched  by  no  frost;  her  white  arms  and 
clear  face  were  flawless  and  smooth,  and  the  light  of  stars 
was  in  her  bright  eyes,  grey  as  a  cloudless  night;  yet  queenly 
she  looked,  and  thought  and  knowledge  were  in  her  glance, 
as  of  one  who  has  known  many  things  that  the  years  bring.
The  dark  patches  grew  darker,  but  they 
shrank;  and  suddenly  he  saw,  towering  ominous  before  him 
and  leaning  slightly  towards  one  another  like  the  pillars  of 
a  headless  door,  two  huge  standing  stones.
‘Just  this,  my  dear  old  Frodo:  you  are  miserable,  because 
you  don’t  know  how  to  say  good-bye.
It  is 
you,  Frodo,  and  that  which  you  bear  that  brings  us  all  in 
peril.’ 

To  that  Frodo  had  no  answer,  and  he  was  persuaded  to 
mount  Glorfindel’s  white  horse.
Feet  were 
coming  down  the  corridor.
Tell  us  your  tale.
‘You  see:  Mr.
‘Elves,  sir!’  He 
would  have  burst  out  of  the  trees  and  dashed  off  towards  the 
voices,  if  they  had  not  pulled  him  back.
‘Elbereth  Gilthonieir  sighed  Legolas  as  he  looked  up.
The  passage  twisted  round  a  few  turns,  and  then  began  to 
descend.
Nearer  at  hand  a  few  lights  twinkled  in  the 
village  of  Woodhall.
‘Don’t  you  come  a  step  nearer!
If  once 
we  shake  off  the  pursuit,  I  shall  make  for  Weathertop.’ 

‘Weathertop?’  said  Sam.
He  knows  that  it  is  not  one  of  the  Seven,  or  the  Nine, 
for  they  are  accounted  for.
‘They’re  looking  for  Baggins,  and  if  they  mean  well,  then  I’m 
a  hobbit.
The  hills  drew  nearer.
‘Something  like 
this: 


The  finest  rockets  ever  seen: 
they  burst  in  stars  of  blue  and  green, 
or  after  thunder  golden  showers 
came  falling  like  a  rain  of  flowers.
He  stood  still  enchanted,  while  the  sweet  syllables  of  the 
Elvish  song  fell  like  clear  jewels  of  blended  word  and  melody.
Earendil  was 
my  sire,  who  was  born  in  Gondolin  before  its  fall;  and  my 
mother  was  Elwing,  daughter  of  Dior,  son  of  Luthien  of 
Doriath.
But 
say  on!’ 

‘From  the  first  my  heart  misgave  me,  against  all  reason 
that  I  knew,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘and  I  desired  to  know  how  this 
thing  came  to  Gollum,  and  how  long  he  had  possessed  it.
Hop  along,  my  little  friends,  up  the  Withywindle!
‘I 
won’t  have  it,  and  that’s  flat.
‘No,  not  me!
He  shut  his  eyes  and  struggled  for  a  while; 
but  resistance  became  unbearable,  and  at  last  he  slowly  drew 
out  the  chain,  and  slipped  the  Ring  on  the  forefinger  of  his 
left  hand.
‘It  recalled  to 
me  the  glory  of  the  Elder  Days  and  the  hosts  of  Beleriand, 
so  many  great  princes  and  captains  were  assembled.
But  from  the  West  has  come  no  word, 

And  on  the  Hither  Shore 

No  tidings  Elven-folk  have  heard 
Of  Amroth  evermore.
Here  ever  bloom  the  winter  flowers  in  the 
unfading  grass:  the  yellow  elanor,  and  the  pale  niphredil.
They  were  more 
than  weary,  and  yet  there  seemed  no  comfort  in  the  thought 
of  halting  anywhere.
Already  night  was  laid  on  the  flowing  waters  when  the 
travellers  came  at  last  under  the  shadow  of  the  hills.
He  found 
his  way  into  Mirkwood,  as  one  would  expect.
The  sky  above  had 
cleared  again  and  was  slowly  filled  with  twinkling  stars.
If  ever  you  are 
our  guests  at  home,  we  will  treat  you  better.’ 

‘It  seems  to  me  good  enough  for  a  birthday-party,’  said 
Frodo.
The  sun  was  beginning  to  get  low  and  the  light  of  afternoon 
was  on  the  land  as  they  went  down  the  hill.
Wait!
Legolas  and  Gimli  were  running.
‘It  is  their 
wish  that  you  should  ascend  and  speak  with  them.’ 

One  of  the  Elf-wardens  then  blew  a  clear  note  on  a  small 
horn,  and  it  was  answered  three  times  from  far  above.
Yet  if  you  succeed,  then  our  power  is  diminished,  and 
Lothlorien  will  fade,  and  the  tides  of  Time  will  sweep  it  away.
After  a  while  they  plunged  into  a  deeply  cloven  track 
between  tall  trees  that  rustled  their  dry  leaves  in  the  night.
They 
were  only  half  way  across  the  flat,  when  suddenly  there  was 
a  noise  of  horses  galloping.
We  guarded  this  creature  day  and  night, 
at  Gandalf ’s  bidding,  much  though  we  wearied  of  the  task.
It  no  longer  surprised  them; 
but  he  made  no  secret  that  he  owed  his  recent  knowledge 
largely  to  Farmer  Maggot,  whom  he  seemed  to  regard  as  a 
person  of  more  importance  than  they  had  imagined.
He 
was  shaken  by  a  sudden  shame  and  fear;  and  he  felt  a  great 
reluctance  to  reveal  the  Ring,  and  a  loathing  of  its  touch.
If  all  the  grievances  that  stand  between  Elves  and 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND  333 

Dwarves  are  to  be  brought  up  here,  we  may  as  well  abandon 
this  Council.’ 

Gloin  rose  and  bowed,  and  Legolas  continued.
Who  is  that?’  Frodo  asked,  when  he  got  a  chance  to  whis¬ 
per  to  Mr.
Frodo 
began  to  listen.
He  lacks  the 
One  Ring.
The  fires  went  out,  and  blank  darkness  fell.
The  trees  had 
seemed  hostile  before,  as  if  they  harboured  secret  eyes  and 
lurking  dangers;  now  he  wished  that  the  trees  were  still  there.
‘You  will  be  a  fool  if 
you  do,  Bilbo,’  he  said.
‘Of  course,  he  possessed  the  ring  for  many  years,  and  used 
it,  so  it  might  take  a  long  while  for  the  influence  to  wear  off 
-  before  it  was  safe  for  him  to  see  it  again,  for  instance.
It  looked  like  the  black  shade  of  a  horse 
led  by  a  smaller  black  shadow.
Frodo  spoke  haltingly  in  return.
But  I  know  now  where  we  are:  we  have 
reached  the  First  Deep,  the  level  immediately  below  the 
Gates.
’ 

‘Good-bye,  for  the  present,  Bilbo.
The  other  hobbits  were  asleep.
The  night  grew  on, 
and  the  lights  in  the  valley  went  out.
‘Flee  them!
‘Can  you  see  any  markings  on  it?’  he  asked.
Why  cannot  we  decide, 
and  so  help  Frodo?
‘So  you 
heard  that  Mr.
If  it  were  known  that  hobbits 
had  such  hides,  all  the  hunters  of  Middle-earth  would  be 
riding  to  the  Shire.’ 

‘And  all  the  arrows  of  all  the  hunters  in  the  world  would 
be  in  vain,’  said  Gimli,  gazing  at  the  mail  in  wonder.
They  found  themselves  in  a  wide  corridor.
I  came  too  late.’ 


350 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Ah,  alas!’  cried  Gloin.
The  Shadow  has 
crept  now  to  the  feet  of  the  Mountains,  and  draws  nigh  even 
to  the  borders  of  the  Greyflood;  and  under  the  Shadow  all  is 
dark  to  me.
Against  the  way  that  seems  easier.
His  pace  is  light  and 
smooth;  and  if  danger  presses  too  near,  he  will  bear  you  away 
with  a  speed  that  even  the  black  steeds  of  the  enemy  cannot 
rival.’ 

‘No,  he  will  not!’  said  Frodo.
They  did  not  halt  until  they  were  out  of  bowshot  from  the 
walls.
How  would  this  do:  and  they  all  settled  down  and 
lived  together  happily  ever  after ?’ 

‘It  will  do  well,  if  it  ever  comes  to  that,’  said  Frodo.
‘No.
Butterbur?’ 

‘That’s  right!
As  Strider  raised  it  they  saw  that  near  the  end  its  edge  was 
notched  and  the  point  was  broken  off.
He  thought  the  ring  was  very 
beautiful,  and  very  useful  at  need;  and  if  anything  was  wrong 
or  queer,  it  was  himself.
By  light  of  moon  and  ray  of  star 
In  frosty  heavens  shivering.
You  have  a  good  blade,  Frodo  son  of  Drogo!’ 

There  was  a  crash  on  the  door,  followed  by  crash  after 
crash.
Besides 
Bree  itself,  there  was  Staddle  on  the  other  side  of  the  hill, 
Combe  in  a  deep  valley  a  little  further  eastward,  and  Archet 
on  the  edge  of  the  Chetwood.
Still  no  one  spoke.
The  food  was  mostly  in  the  form  of  very  thin  cakes, 
made  of  a  meal  that  was  baked  a  light  brown  on  the  outside, 
and  inside  was  the  colour  of  cream.
This  was  the  sort  of  stuff  they  liked:  short  and  obvious.
Gildor  said  you  should  take  them  as  was  will¬ 
ing,  and  you  can’t  deny  it.’ 

‘I  don’t  deny  it,’  said  Frodo,  looking  at  Sam,  who  was  now 
grinning.
When  they  came  to  the  northernmost  corner  of  the  lake 
they  found  a  narrow  creek  that  barred  their  way.
The  others  are  out  of  sight.’ 

The  night- wind  blew  chill  up  the  valley  to  meet  them.
;  and  his  madness  in  putting  on  the  Ring  in  the  dell 
under  Weathertop.
We  cannot  block  the  door.
No  time  for  talking.
The  sunlight  glittering  on  the 
water  dazzled  his  eyes.
‘Wait!’  he  said  in  a  commanding  voice,  giving  Frodo  a 
quick  look  from  under  his  bristling  brows.
The  Dunadan  has  told  me  more.
‘We  cannot  go  further  tonight,’  said  Boromir.
Immediately  after  their  cold 
and  comfortless  breakfast  Strider  went  off  alone,  telling  the 
others  to  remain  under  the  shelter  of  the  cliff,  until  he  came 
back.
Out 
of  it  a  fierce  red  light  came,  and  now  and  again  flames  licked 
at  the  brink  and  curled  about  the  bases  of  the  columns.
But  we  shall  soon 
see.
On  their  heads  were  circlets,  gold 
chains  were  about  their  waists,  and  on  their  fingers  were  many 
rings.
‘But  for  the  moment,  since  most  of  all  you  need  to  know 
how  this  thing  came  to  you,  and  that  will  be  tale  enough,  this 
is  all  that  I  will  say.
‘All  well  eh?’  said  Gandalf.
In  one  of  the  windows  he  caught  a  glimpse  of 
a  sallow  face  with  sly,  slanting  eyes;  but  it  vanished  at  once.
Hence  the  excitement  of 
the  hobbit-children.
A  sudden  dread  and  a  horror  of  the  chamber  fell  on  the 
Company.
There  was  a  blow  on  the  door  that  made  it 
quiver;  and  then  it  began  to  grind  slowly  open,  driving  back 
the  wedges.
When  they  woke  they  found  that  the 
light  of  day  was  broad  upon  the  lawn  before  the  pavilion,  and 
the  fountain  rose  and  fell  glittering  in  the  sun.
Pity,  and  Mercy: 
not  to  strike  without  need.
But  Sam 
had  more  on  his  mind  than  gardening.
We  will  all 
remain  together  and  bar  this  window  and  the  door.
Too  long  I  have  dwelt  upon  this  Hither  Shore 

And  in  a  fading  crown  have  twined  the  golden  elanor.
‘And  I  do  not  ask,  for  I  have  already  been  told  that  you 
are  the  kinsman  and  adopted  heir  of  our  friend  Bilbo  the 
renowned.
You  can  say  that  I  was  too  strong  and  took  it  by 
force.
‘What  is  it?’  he  whispered,  springing  up  and  coming  to 
Frodo.
Bilbo  never  did  a  kinder  deed  than  when  he  brought  the 
lad  back  to  live  among  decent  folk.
to  the  bottle  I  go 
To  heal  my  heart  and  drown  my  woe.
Gilthoniel!
Most  likely  it  seems  that 
if  he  were  here  now  the  choice  would  still  wait  on  you.
When  Pippin  had  gone,  he  came 
and  sat  curled  up  at  Frodo’s  feet,  where  at  last  he  nodded 
and  closed  his  eyes.
These  Black  Riders:  I  am  not  sure,  but 
I  think,  I  fear  they  come  from - ’ 

‘They  come  from  Mordor,’  said  Strider  in  a  low  voice.
‘It  is  long  since  any  of  my  own  folic  journeyed  hither 
back  to  the  land  whence  we  wandered  in  ages  long  ago,’ 


440 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


said  Legolas,  ‘but  we  hear  that  Lorien  is  not  yet  deserted, 
for  there  is  a  secret  power  here  that  holds  evil  from  the 
land.
He  went  alone  to  look  in  Mirror  mere,  an 
ore  shot  him  from  behind  a  stone,  we  slew  the  ore,  but  many  more 
.
But  tonight  two  must  watch  together  in  turns: 
three  hours  off  and  one  on  guard.’ 

Nothing  happened  that  night  worse  than  a  brief  drizzle  of 
rain  an  hour  before  dawn.
It  might  have  been  laughing,  and 
it  might  not.
Have  you  got  the  bath-water  hot?’ 

Sam  jumped  up,  looking  rather  bleary.
Then 
with  little  further  hindrance,  save  from  sprawling  briars  and 
many  fallen  stones,  they  moved  forward  all  together.
‘Not  a  sound  but  the  wind,’  he  said.
Boromir  leaped  forward  and  hewed  at  the  arm  with  all  his 
might;  but  his  sword  rang,  glanced  aside,  and  fell  from  his 
shaken  hand.
I  have  done  this  and  that.
Suddenly  a  shadow,  like  the  shape  of 
great  wings,  passed  across  the  moon.
Only  a  few  yards 
ahead  dark  shapes  loomed  up  in  the  stream  and  he  heard  the 
swirl  of  racing  water.
I 
didn’t  learn  that  part,  it  gave  me  the  shivers.
‘I  hope  it  won’t  come  to 
that!’ 

‘Do  not  speak  that  name  so  loudly!’  said  Strider.
Beneath  the  stars  of  Ever- eve  in  Eldamar  it  shone, 

In  Eldamar  beside  the  walls  of  Elven  Tirion.
I  hope  that  you’ll  not 
take  it  amiss.
Dimrill  Dale  lay  about  them.
As  soon  as  it  was  fully  light  they 
started.
You  can  keep  your  secret  for  the 
present,  if  you  want  to  be  mysterious.
Turning  quickly  they  saw  ripples,  black-edged 
with  shadow  in  the  waning  light:  great  rings  were  widening 
outwards  from  a  point  far  out  in  the  lake.
Southward  he 
looked,  and  below  his  very  feet  the  Great  River  curled  like  a 
toppling  wave  and  plunged  over  the  falls  of  Rauros  into  a 
foaming  pit;  a  glimmering  rainbow  played  upon  the  fume.
There  you’ll  find  an 
old  inn  that  is  called  The  Prancing  Pony.
‘Who  was 
Gil-galad?’  asked  Merry;  but  Strider  did  not  answer,  and 
seemed  to  be  lost  in  thought.
Will  you  do  something  for  me?
He  was  perhaps 
a  trifle  annoyed  with  Tom  for  seeming  to  make  so  light  of 
what  even  Gandalf  thought  so  perilously  important.
Baggins  was  still 
living  at  Crickhollow.
It  was  perhaps  only  a  large  stone  or 
jutting  rock  shown  up  by  the  pale  light.
After  that 
journey,  and  the  road  I  have  trodden  with  this  Company,  I 
do  not  much  doubt  that  I  shall  find  a  way  through  Rohan, 
and  Fangorn  too,  if  need  be.’ 

‘Then  I  need  say  no  more,’  said  Celeborn.
‘I  don’t  know  what 
this  Man  has  been  up  to.
It  is  nearly 
midnight.’ 

‘I  thought  you  liked  walking  in  the  dark,’  said  Frodo.
Frodo!’  he  said,  shaking  his 
head.
He  felt  that  he  had  only 
to  slip  it  on,  and  then  he  would  be  safe.
For  here  I  fear  we 
must  say  farewell  to  our  good  beast  of  burden.
Yes  it  is 
-  a  tidy  way.
Yet  they  should  not 
go  too  far  up  that  stream,  nor  risk  becoming  entangled  in  the 
Forest  of  Fangorn.
The  Riders  seemed  to  sit  upon  their  great  steeds  like 
threatening  statues  upon  a  hill,  dark  and  solid,  while  all  the 
woods  and  land  about  them  receded  as  if  into  a  mist.
How  could  that  be,  if  you  did  not  know  how  to 
enter?’ 

‘The  answer  to  your  first  question,  Boromir,’  said  the  wiz¬ 
ard,  ‘is  that  I  do  not  know  the  word  -  yet.
Sam  walked  along  at  Frodo’s  side,  as  if  in  a 
dream,  with  an  expression  on  his  face  half  of  fear  and  half  of 
astonished  joy.
Then  he  spoke  slowly.
A  feast!’  said  Merry.
The  river,  now  small  and 
swift,  was  leaping  merrily  down  to  meet  them,  glinting  here 
and  there  in  the  light  of  the  stars,  which  were  already  shining 
in  the  sky.
‘To  tell  you  the  truth,  since 
you  have  guessed  it,  we  got  into  the  lane  from  the  other  end: 
we  had  come  over  your  fields.
He 
jumped  over  a  low  place  in  the  hedge  at  the  bottom,  and  took 
to  the  meadows,  passing  into  the  night  like  a  rustle  of  wind 
in  the  grass.
Athelas  they  named  it,  and  it  grows 
now  sparsely  and  only  near  places  where  they  dwelt  or 
camped  of  old;  and  it  is  not  known  in  the  North,  except  to 
some  of  those  who  wander  in  the  Wild.
Let  me 
be  alone!’ 

Aragorn  looked  at  him  with  kindly  pity.
They  were  the  hobbits’ 
chief  source  of  news  from  distant  parts  -  if  they  wanted  any:  as 
a  rule  dwarves  said  little  and  hobbits  asked  no  more.
Then  they 
gasped.
‘How  it  angers  me!
‘If  you  pick  up  with  a  horse-thief,  and  bring  him  to  my 
house,’  said  Butterbur  angrily,  ‘you  ought  to  pay  for  all  the 
damage  yourselves  and  not  come  shouting  at  me.
I  might  prove  useful.
If  any  of  these  black  fellows 
come  after  you  again,  I’ll  deal  with  them.
Having  sung  his  song  he  would  say  no 
more.
Tom  put  his  mouth 
to  the  crack  and  began  singing  into  it  in  a  low  voice.
Slowly  it  divided  in  the  middle  and  swung 
outwards  inch  by  inch,  until  both  doors  lay  back  against  the 
wall.
But  I  don’t  feel 
like  that  now.
A  power  was  there  that  we 
have  not  felt  before.
At  length  they  stirred  and  looked  up,  and  began  to  search 
for  anything  that  would  give  them  tidings  of  Balin’s  fate,  or 
show  what  had  become  of  his  folk.
There  was  also  a  strange  Elf  clad  in  green  and  brown, 
Legolas,  a  messenger  from  his  father,  Thranduil,  the  King  of 
the  Elves  of  Northern  Mirkwood.
On  the  third  morn¬ 
ing  Caradhras  rose  before  them,  a  mighty  peak,  tipped  with 
snow  like  silver,  but  with  sheer  naked  sides,  dull  red  as  if 
stained  with  blood.
‘Follow  me!’  said  Merry,  ‘and  you  will  see.’  He  turned  to 
the  left  along  the  Hedge,  and  soon  they  came  to  a  point  where 
it  bent  inwards,  running  along  the  lip  of  a  hollow.
‘It’s  a  pretty  thing,  isn’t  it?’  said  Bilbo,  moving  it  in  the 
light.
I  can’t 
see  your  hand.’ 

‘Here  it  is.
‘Well!’  he 
said.
Then  there  was  a  dull  rumble  and  a  heavy  thud.
‘And  let  us  hope  that  none  will  ever  speak  it  here  again,’ 
answered  Gandalf.
Most  of 
the  company  were,  however,  now  in  a  tolerant  mood,  at  that 
delightful  stage  which  they  called  ‘filling  up  the  corners’.
‘You  want  to  sleep,  I  expect.
‘It  will  find  its  way 
in,  and  then  I  shall  drown.’  He  felt  that  he  was  lying  in  a  soft 
slimy  bog,  and  springing  up  he  set  his  foot  on  the  corner  of 
a  cold  hard  flagstone.
He  caught 
the  strange  gleam  in  Boromir’s  eyes,  yet  his  face  was  still  kind 
and  friendly.
See,  here  they  come  again,  bringing  all 
their  burdens!’ 

Merry,  Sam,  and  Pippin  now  clothed  themselves  in  spare 
garments  from  their  packs;  and  they  soon  felt  too  hot,  for 
they  were  obliged  to  put  on  some  of  the  thicker  and  warmer 
things  that  they  had  brought  against  the  oncoming  of  winter.
He  peered  between  the  hemlock-leaves 
And  saw  in  wonder  flowers  of  gold 
Upon  her  mantle  and  her  sleeves, 

And  her  hair  like  shadow  following.
‘It  is  broad  daylight 
with  a  bright  sun,  and  yet  you  come  back  trying  to  scare  me 
with  a  tale  of  live  trolls  waiting  for  us  in  this  glade!
Fierce  voices  rose 
up  to  greet  it  from  across  the  water.
Pippin 
noticed  it.
‘He  was 
really  very  kind  to  us  and  did  all  that  he  could.’ 

Gandalf  laughed.
The  sun  was  already  behind  the  western 
hills,  and  the  light  was  failing.
We  will 
make  them  fear  the  Chamber  of  Mazarbul!’  he  said  grimly, 
feeling  the  edge  of  his  sword,  Anduril.
But  ere  long  it  escaped  our  skill,  and  we 
dared  not  continue  the  hunt;  for  we  were  drawing  nigh  to  Dol 
Guldur,  and  that  is  still  a  very  evil  place;  we  do  not  go  that  way.
The  fire  leapt 
from  tree-top  to  tree-top.
‘This  was  the  stroke 
of  Frodo’s  sword,’  he  said.
The  landlord  introduced  the  newcomers  to  the 
Bree-folk,  so  quickly  that,  though  they  caught  many  names, 
they  were  seldom  sure  who  the  names  belonged  to.
His  head 
was  dark,  crowned  with  sharp  white  stars  that  glittered  in  the 
black  pools  of  the  sky  behind.
Strider  shall  be  your  guide.
THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


367 


The  first  part  of  their  journey  was  hard  and  dreary,  and  Frodo 
remembered  little  of  it,  save  the  wind.
You  are  wise 
and  powerful.
There  was  no  undergrowth.
There  was  a  quiver  in  the  stone  and 
the  stairs  trembled,  but  the  doors  did  not  open.
‘Some  there  are  among  us  who  sing  that  the  Shadow  will 
draw  back,  and  peace  shall  come  again.
At  last  they  left  the  village  behind.
‘I  have  myself  been  at  whiles  in  Rohan,  but  I  have  never 
crossed  it  northwards.
And  the 
poor  old  troll!’  With  that  he  fell  fast  asleep.
There  was  a  rush  of  hoarse  laughter,  like  the  fall  of  sliding 


422 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


stones  into  a  pit;  amid  the  clamour  a  deep  voice  was  raised 
in  command.
We  are 
Exiles,  and  most  of  our  kindred  have  long  ago  departed  and 
we  too  are  now  only  tarrying  here  a  while,  ere  we  return  over 
the  Great  Sea.
Pippin  went  on  talking  for  a  while.
‘There  isn’t  no  call 
to  go  talking  of  pushing  and  pulling.
Well,  let  folly  be  our  cloak,  a 
veil  before  the  eyes  of  the  Enemy!
And  I  don’t  really  see  why  I  should.
But  however  anxious  their  guides  might  be,  it  was  plain 
that  the  hobbits  could  go  no  further  that  night.
‘Yes,’  answered  Frodo.
I  have  also  glimpsed  many  hawks  flying  high  up  in 
the  sky.
But  my  heart 
forbodes  that,  ere  all  is  ended,  you,  Frodo  son  of  Drogo,  will 
know  more  of  these  fell  things  than  Gildor  Inglorion.
About  mid¬ 
night  carriages  came  for  the  important  folk.
Desperate,  he  drew  his  own  sword,  and  it 
seemed  to  him  that  it  flickered  red,  as  if  it  was  a  firebrand.
Northward  he  looked,  and  the  Great 
River  lay  like  a  ribbon  beneath  him,  and  the  Misty  Mountains 
stood  small  and  hard  as  broken  teeth.
The  chanting  ceased.
‘My  fair  lady,  clad  all  in  silver  green!
‘Not 


STRIDER 


221 


much,  Barliman,  but  every  little  helps.
At  once  Strider  flung  himself  on  the  ground  behind  the 
ruined  circle,  pulling  Frodo  down  beside  him.
I’m  run  off  my  feet;  but  I’ll  see  what  I  can  do  for  you.
‘I  am  weary,  but  I  still  have 
some  strength  left,  and  Aragorn  too.
Not  if  you  know  of 
anyone  you  can  trust,  and  who  would  be  willing  to  go  by 
your  side  -  and  that  you  would  be  willing  to  take  into 
unknown  perils.
I 
thought  all  the  trees  were  whispering  to  each  other,  passing 
news  and  plots  along  in  an  unintelligible  language;  and  the 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


145 


branches  swayed  and  groped  without  any  wind.
The  fire  in  it  seemed  to  die, 
but  the  darkness  grew.
Please  remember ,  said  one  of  them,  that  the  name  Baggins  must 
not  be  mentioned.
‘Let  us  get  out  on  to 
clean  grass!
Don’t  disturb  it!’ 

‘I  wish  we  could  get  away!’  said  Merry.
If  you  want  to  know  how  I  first  found  out,  I  will 
tell  you.’ 

‘Go  on!’  said  Frodo  faintly.
They 
pushed  a  low  chair  against  the  door  and  shut  the  window.
None  of  the  Ores  will  ever  return  out  of 
Lorien.
‘I 
think  now,’  said  Strider,  ‘that  the  enemy  has  been  watching 
this  place  for  some  days.
How  I  would  drive  the  hosts  of  Mordor,  and  all  men  would 
flock  to  my  banner!’ 

Boromir  strode  up  and  down,  speaking  ever  more  loudly.
He  pored  over 
it  for  some  time  without  speaking.
What  did  you  think 
of  it?’ 

‘I  am  not  going  to  try  and  guess,’  said  Frodo  smiling.
Barley ,  he  says  to  me,  this  friend  of  mine  from  the  Shire,  he  may 
be  coming  out  this  way  before  long,  him  and  another.
The  Younger  Days  are 
beginning.
‘It  is  fortunate  that  I  could 
find  it,  for  it  is  a  healing  plant  that  the  Men  of  the  West 
brought  to  Middle-earth.
I  am  leaving  the  Shire 
as  soon  as  ever  I  can  -  in  fact  I  have  made  up  my  mind  now 
not  even  to  wait  a  day  at  Crickhollow,  if  it  can  be  helped.’ 

‘Very  good,  sir!’ 

‘You  still  mean  to  come  with  me?’ 

‘I  do.’ 

‘It  is  going  to  be  very  dangerous,  Sam.
Si  man  iyulma  nin  enquantuva?
Well,  Frodo,’  said  Aragorn  at  last.
Though  Ores  will  often  pursue  foes 
for  many  leagues  into  the  plain,  if  they  have  a  fallen  captain 
to  avenge.’ 

Frodo  did  not  answer.
That  was  an  eye-opener,  and 
no  mistake!
“I  was  seeking  you.
Pippin  had 
vanished.
‘Here  is  the  city  of 
the  Galadhrim  where  dwell  the  Lord  Celeborn  and  Galadriel 
the  Lady  of  Lorien.
In  place  of  the  Dark  Lord  you  will  set  up  a  Queen.
The  song  ended.
Though 
the  hobbits  ate,  as  only  famished  hobbits  can  eat,  there  was 
no  lack.
‘I  hope  so,’  said  Frodo.
‘We  have  come 
to  bid  our  last  farewell,’  she  said,  ‘and  to  speed  you  with 
blessings  from  our  land.’ 

‘Though  you  have  been  our  guests,’  said  Celeborn,  ‘you 
have  not  yet  eaten  with  us,  and  we  bid  you,  therefore,  to  a 
parting  feast,  here  between  the  flowing  waters  that  will  bear 
you  far  from  Lorien.’ 

The  Swan  passed  on  slowly  to  the  hythe,  and  they  turned 
their  boats  and  followed  it.
But  if  Fatty  is 
willing  to  hold  the  fort,  and  I  can  be  sure  of  Gandalf  knowing 
the  way  we  have  gone,  that  decides  me.
What  he  saw  was  an  elm  tree, 
as  like  as  not.’ 

‘But  this  one  was  walking ,  I  tell  you;  and  there  ain’t  no  elm 
tree  on  the  North  Moors.’ 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


59 


‘Then  Hal  can’t  have  seen  one,’  said  Ted.
Small  wonder  that  trouble  came 
of  it,  I  say.
But  suddenly  the  Mirror  went  altogether  dark,  as  dark  as 
if  a  hole  had  opened  in  the  world  of  sight,  and  Frodo  looked 
into  emptiness.
“White!”  he  sneered.
Ever  since  they 
had  entered  the  Forest  they  had  thought  chiefly  of  getting 
back  to  the  Road;  only  now  when  it  lay  beneath  their  feet  did 
they  remember  the  danger  which  pursued  them,  and  was 
more  than  likely  to  be  lying  in  wait  for  them  upon  the  Road 
itself.
There  was  a  sound  of  hoofs  in  the  lane, 
some  way  behind,  but  coming  slow  and  clear  down  the  wind.
While  Gimli  and  the  two  younger  hobbits  kindled  a  fire  of 
brush-  and  fir-wood,  and  drew  water,  Aragorn  tended  Sam 
and  Frodo.
In 
this  hour  take  the  name  that  was  foretold  for  you,  Elessar, 
the  Elfstone  of  the  House  of  Elendil!’ 

Then  Aragorn  took  the  stone  and  pinned  the  brooch  upon 
his  breast,  and  those  who  saw  him  wondered;  for  they  had 
not  marked  before  how  tall  and  kingly  he  stood,  and  it  seemed 
to  them  that  many  years  of  toil  had  fallen  from  his  shoulders.
We  can’t  have  a  nap  yet.
On  the  green  hank  near  to  the  very  point  of  the 
Tongue  the  Lady  Galadriel  stood  alone  and  silent.
Not  many  now  remain 
in  Middle-earth,  east  of  the  Great  Sea.
One  moment 
Glorfmdel  turned  and  listened,  then  he  sprang  forward  with 
a  loud  cry.
They  felt  as  if  a  trap  was  closing  about  them;  but  they  did 
not  quite  lose  heart.
To  Legolas  she  gave  a  bow  such  as 
the  Galadhrim  used,  longer  and  stouter  than  the  bows  of 
Mirkwood,  and  strung  with  a  string  of  elf-hair.
But  I  agree  that 
we  can  go  no  further  tonight.’ 

What  is  the  matter  with  my  master?’  asked  Sam  in  a  low 
voice,  looking  appealingly  at  Strider.
‘Last  night  you  began  to  tell  me  strange  things  about  my 
ring,  Gandalf,’  he  said.
The  Ring!’  they  cried  with  deadly  voices;  and 
immediately  their  leader  urged  his  horse  forward  into  the 
water,  followed  closely  by  two  others.
‘I  am  content.
‘I  will  climb  up,’  said  Legolas.
I  couldn’t  see  no  more  eyes,  though.
He  listened.
Yet  there  is  still  hope  that 
they  will  not  fail.’ 

‘No  hope  while  the  Ring  lasts,’  said  Frodo.
At  last  they  set  off.
Still,  it  may  be  useful.’ 

‘It  may,  and  it  may  not,’  said  Gandalf.
Here  lay  aside  your  burden  for  a 
while!’ 

Welcome  son  of  Thranduil!
‘It’s  fine  to  see  you  up  and  yourself 
again,  sir!
‘But  I  reckon  it  was  a  nasty  knock  for  those  Sackville- 
Bagginses.
The 
history  and  character  of  Mr.
‘I  wonder  greatly  what  brings  four  hobbits  on  so  long 
a  journey.
‘Lock  the  door,  and  don’t  open  it  to 


52 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


anyone  today,  not  even  if  they  bring  a  battering  ram.’  Then 
he  went  to  revive  himself  with  a  belated  cup  of  tea.
We  have  never  said  farewell  to  her,  nor  seen  her  since  the 
evening!’  He  was  so  distressed  that  he  turned  back;  but  at 
that  moment  a  clear  call  came  rippling  down.
In 
the  dusk  its  headstall  flickered  and  flashed,  as  if  it  were  stud¬ 
ded  with  gems  like  living  stars.
Tom’s  words  laid 
bare  the  hearts  of  trees  and  their  thoughts,  which  were  often 
dark  and  strange,  and  filled  with  a  hatred  of  things  that  go  free 
upon  the  earth,  gnawing,  biting,  breaking,  hacking,  burning: 
destroyers  and  usurpers.
‘Still  that  must  be  expected,’  said  Gandalf  to  himself.
Maybe  Mr.
‘But  it  was  broken,  you  know.
I  have  had  a  month  of 
exile  and  adventure,  and  I  find  that  has  been  as  much  as  I 
want.
Let  me  see!
I  shall  kick  you  hard  to 
make  sure.
Let  us  be  glad  that  the  first  stage 
is  safely  over.
Doubtless  we  shall  be  hidden  from  all  unfriendly  eyes  when 
the  snow  has  covered  us,  but  that  will  not  help  us.’ 

‘You  may  make  a  fire,  if  you  can,’  answered  Gandalf.
‘All  right!
‘Only  one  thing  is  clear  to  me,’  said  Otho,  ‘and  that  is  that 
you  are  doing  exceedingly  well  out  of  it.
There  was  hot  soup,  cold  meats, 
a  blackberry  tart,  new  loaves,  slabs  of  butter,  and  half  a  ripe 
cheese:  good  plain  food,  as  good  as  the  Shire  could  show, 


202 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


and  homelike  enough  to  dispel  the  last  of  Sam’s  misgivings 
(already  much  relieved  by  the  excellence  of  the  beer) .
‘Ponies  would  not  help  us  to  escape  horsemen,’  he  said  at 
last,  thoughtfully,  as  if  he  guessed  what  Frodo  had  in  mind.
There  were  green  trees  with  trunks  of  dark 


36 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


smoke:  their  leaves  opened  like  a  whole  spring  unfolding  in  a 
moment,  and  their  shining  branches  dropped  glowing  flowers 
down  upon  the  astonished  hobbits,  disappearing  with  a  sweet 
scent  just  before  they  touched  their  upturned  faces.
‘Good  luck,  Sam!’  he  said.
But  all  were  destroyed  in  the 
war  that  brought  the  North  Kingdom  to  its  end.
Merry  expects  us  some  time  the  day 
after  tomorrow;  but  that  leaves  us  nearly  two  days  more.
But  all  the  while  I  sit  and  think 
of  times  there  were  before, 

I  listen  for  returning  feet 
and  voices  at  the  door.
After  they  had  eaten  and  drunk,  sitting  upon  the  grass, 
Celeborn  spoke  to  them  again  of  their  journey,  and  lifting  his 
hand  he  pointed  south  to  the  woods  beyond  the  Tongue.
My 
old  dad  would  take  on  so.
‘For  tonight  we  go  to  the  woods  on  the  hills  above  Wood- 
hall.
Thereupon  Elrond  paused  a  while  and  sighed.
It  appeared  that  amid  the 
splendour  of  their  works  of  hand  the  hearts  of  the  Dwarves 
of  the  Lonely  Mountain  were  troubled.
‘You  can’t  tell  which  parts  were  mine, 
and  which  were  the  Dunadan’s?’ 

‘It  is  not  easy  for  us  to  tell  the  difference  between  two 
mortals,’  said  the  Elf.
‘So  it  is,’  they  answered.
The  table  is  all  laden  with  yellow  cream, 
honeycomb,  and  white  bread  and  butter.
For  darkness  will 
flow  between  us,  and  it  may  be  that  we  shall  not  meet  again, 
unless  it  be  far  hence  upon  a  road  that  has  no  returning.’ 

And  Aragorn  answered:  ‘Lady,  you  know  all  my  desire, 
and  long  held  in  keeping  the  only  treasure  that  I  seek.
‘But  there  is  no  need  to  get  angry.’ 

‘If  I  am  it  is  your  fault,’  said  Bilbo.
But  danger  has  come  on  you  sooner  than  you 
expected,  and  now  you  are  making  up  your  mind  to  go  at  once.
Elrond  gave  it  to  me  at  our  parting.
It  tells  of  the 
meeting  of  Beren  son  of  Barahir  and  Luthien  Timiviel.
The  hobbits  under 
the  spell  of  Tom’s  words  may  have  missed  one  meal  or  many, 
but  when  the  food  was  before  them  it  seemed  at  least  a  week 
since  they  had  eaten.
I  have  paid  for  it  since  with  many 
dark  and  dangerous  days.
I  feel  I  could  sing,  if  I  knew  the  right  song  for  the 
occasion.’ 

‘I  feel  like  singing  myself,’  laughed  Frodo.
It  shone  like  moonlit  silver,  and 
was  studded  with  white  gems.
‘Well,  that’s  that,’  he  said.
O  slender  as  a  willow-wand!
Then  here  and  there  the  mist  gave  way  and  he  saw 
many  visions:  small  and  clear  as  if  they  were  under  his  eyes 
upon  a  table,  and  yet  remote.
I  don’t  doubt  they  were  mostly  full  of  treasure  he  had  picked 
up  in  foreign  parts,  where  there  be  mountains  of  gold,  they 
say;  but  there  wasn’t  enough  to  fill  tunnels.
It  was  made  on  the  model  of  the  dwarf-song  that  started 
Bilbo  on  his  adventure  long  ago,  and  went  to  the  same  tune: 

Farewell  we  call  to  hearth  and  hall!
Then  sud¬ 
denly  the  trees  came  to  an  end  and  the  mists  were  left  behind.
They  were  to  start  at  dusk,  for  Elrond 
counselled  them  to  journey  under  cover  of  night  as  often  as 
they  could,  until  they  were  far  from  Rivendell.
‘No  one  ever  found  out  what  had  become  of  Deagol;  he 
was  murdered  far  from  home,  and  his  body  was  cunningly 
hidden.
Think  of  the  riddles 
they  both  knew,  for  one  thing.’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Frodo.
But  as  you  please!
It  did  look  like  home.
In  those  days  the  Great  Enemy, 
of  whom  Sauron  of  Mordor  was  but  a  servant,  dwelt  in 
Angband  in  the  North,  and  the  Elves  of  the  West  coming 
back  to  Middle-earth  made  war  upon  him  to  regain  the 
Silmarils  which  he  had  stolen;  and  the  fathers  of  Men  aided 
the  Elves.
He  opened  his  eyes  and  looked  at  them  with  a  sudden  glint 
of  blue: 

And  that  proved  well  for  you  -  for  now  I  shall  no  longer 
go  down  deep  again  along  the  forest-water, 
not  while  the  year  is  old.
He  shut  the  door  hastily,  and  leaned  against 
it.
In  a 
hundred  yards  or  so  it  brought  them  to  the  river-bank,  where 
there  was  a  broad  wooden  landing-stage.
Your  Hal’s  always  saying  he’s  seen 
things;  and  maybe  he  sees  things  that  ain’t  there.’ 

‘But  this  one  was  as  big  as  an  elm  tree,  and  walking  - 
walking  seven  yards  to  a  stride,  if  it  was  an  inch.’ 

‘Then  I  bet  it  wasn’t  an  inch.
I  sit  beside  the  fire  and  think 
of  how  the  world  will  be 
when  winter  comes  without  a  spring 
that  I  shall  ever  see.
Each  day  the  land 
looked  much  the  same  as  it  had  the  day  before.
Often  he  was  seen 
walking  and  talking  with  the  strange  wayfarers  that  began  at 
this  time  to  appear  in  the  Shire.
Soon  they  were  leading  their  ponies  in  single  file  over  the 
rim  and  down  the  long  northward  slope  of  the  hill,  down  into 
a  foggy  sea.
But  the  ceiling  looked  strange;  it  was  flat,  and  it  had 
dark  beams  richly  carved.
‘I  had  not  thought  of  that.
Both  father  and  son  were  on  very 
friendly  terms  with  Bilbo  and  Frodo.
Though  he  was  thinking 
of  gardening,  not  of  roosting  like  a  bird,  nor  of  trying  to  walk 
like  a  spider.
We  may,’  said  Sam.
Ride!’  cried  Glorfindel  to  Frodo.
Near  at  hand  the  mist 
was  now  almost  gone;  though  here  and  there  it  lay  in  hollows 
of  the  wood,  and  to  the  south  of  them,  out  of  a  deep  fold 
cutting  right  across  the  Forest,  the  fog  still  rose  like  steam  or 
wisps  of  white  smoke.
That  proved  too  great  a 
strain.
‘You  have  still  got  the  ring  in  your  pocket,’  said  the  wizard.
‘This 
is  Sting,’  he  said,  and  thrust  it  with  little  effort  deep  into 
a  wooden  beam.
Sam  sat  down  and  scratched  his  head,  and  yawned  like  a 
cavern.
Farewell!’  Varda  is  the  name  of  that  Lady  whom  the  Elves 
in  these  lands  of  exile  name  Elbereth.
After  the  feast  (more  or  less)  came  the  Speech.
It  was  but  one  hour  after  noon.
I 
shan’t  travel  again.
‘Fare¬ 
well,  Gandalf !’  he  cried.
We  don’t  know  how  many  there  are;  but  there  are  at  least 
two,  and  possibly  more.
‘No  indeed!’  said  Elrond,  turning  towards  him  with  a  smile.
Mr.
His  hair  was  perhaps  whiter  than  it  had  been  then, 
and  his  beard  and  eyebrows  were  perhaps  longer,  and  his 
face  more  lined  with  care  and  wisdom;  but  his  eyes  were  as 
bright  as  ever,  and  he  smoked  and  blew  smoke-rings  with  the 
same  vigour  and  delight.
‘Upon  the  left  stands  Amon  Lhaw,  and  upon  the 
right  is  Amon  Hen,  the  Hills  of  Hearing  and  of  Sight.
The  hobbits  scrambled  down  a 
steep  green  bank  and  plunged  into  the  thick  trees  below.
In  Moria, 
in  Khazad-dum!
A  Balrog  is  come!’ 

Gimli  stared  with  wide  eyes.
‘The  tidings  that  I  was  sent  to  bring  must 
now  be  told.
When  winter  first  begins  to  bite 
and  stones  crack  in  the  frosty  night, 
when  pools  are  black  and  trees  are  bare, 

’tis  evil  in  the  Wild  to  fare.
Merry  said  it  would  be 
too  stuffy.
‘There  was  more  than  one  power  at  work,  Frodo.
‘I  am  tired 
and  very  worried,  and  it’s  a  long  tale.
Even  our  Nob  has  been  doing  some  guessing 
in  his  slow  pate;  and  there  are  others  in  Bree  quicker  in  the 
uptake  than  he  is.’ 

‘Well,  we  can  only  hope  the  Riders  won’t  come  back  yet,’ 
said  Frodo.
Minutes  or  hours  passed  slowly,  and 
nothing  happened.
The  leaves  of  trees 
were  glistening,  and  every  twig  was  dripping;  the  grass  was 
grey  with  cold  dew.
He  is  a  valiant 
man.’ 

‘There  remain  two  more  to  be  found,’  said  Elrond.
As  they  began  to  climb  its  first  slopes  they  looked 
back  and  saw  the  lamps  in  Hobbiton  far  off  twinkling  in  the 
gentle  valley  of  the  Water.
The  doors  were  thrown  open,  and  they  went 
across  a  wide  passage  and  through  other  doors,  and  came 
into  a  further  hall.
‘The  Moon  is  rising:  it  must  be  getting 
late.’ 

The  others  looked  up.
For  here 
the  heirs  of  Valandil  have  ever  dwelt  in  long  line  unbroken 
from  father  unto  son  for  many  generations.
‘Know  also,  my  friends,  that  I  learned  more  yet  from 
Gollum.
‘I  pass  the  test,’  she  said.
‘  “I  don’t  care,”  said  Deagol.
I’ll  sing 
his  roots  off.
Then  the  echoes  died  as  suddenly  as  a  flame 
blown  out  by  a  dark  wind,  and  the  enemy  advanced  again.
If  we 
could  reach  that  point,  maybe  it  would  prove  easier  beyond.
Some  never 
come  to  be,  unless  those  that  behold  the  visions  turn  aside 
from  their  path  to  prevent  them.
Sand  and  stone  and  pool  and  dell, 

Fare  you  well!
‘What  do  you  think  of  Elves  now,  Sam?’  he  said.
‘There’s  that  Ted 
Sandyman  a-cutting  down  trees  as  he  shouldn’t.
He  was  across  the  Ford.
He  said  farewell 
to  us  on  this  very  spot.
We  don’t  get  Outsiders  -  travellers  from 
the  Shire,  I  should  say,  begging  your  pardon  -  often;  and  we 
like  to  hear  a  bit  of  news,  or  any  story  or  song  you  may 
have  in  mind.
I  am  being  swept  off  my  feet  at 
last,’  he  added,  and  then  in  a  low  voice,  as  if  to  himself,  he 
sang  softly  in  the  dark: 

The  Road  goes  ever  on  and  on 
Down  from  the  door  where  it  began.
In  the  black  abyss  there  appeared  a  single 
Eye  that  slowly  grew,  until  it  filled  nearly  all  the  Mirror.
Frodo  had  a  good 
voice,  and  the  song  tickled  their  fancy.
It  was, 
unfortunately,  very  clear  and  correct  (according  to  the  legal 
customs  of  hobbits,  which  demand  among  other  things  seven 
signatures  of  witnesses  in  red  ink) .
He  told 
me  he  did  not  feel  it  was  really  his,  as  it  came  from  robbers.’ 

The  Road  lay  quiet  under  the  long  shadows  of  early 
evening.
Especially 
if  you  are  coming  back  to  live  in  Buckland.
He  shrank  back, 
and  for  a  moment  he  stood  trembling  in  the  hall.
‘Very  well,  I  will  take  it,’  said  Frodo.
Old 
grey  Willow-man,  he’s  a  mighty  singer;  and  it’s  hard  for  little 
folic  to  escape  his  cunning  mazes.
After  the  Road  had  run  down  some  way,  and  had  left 
Bree-hill  standing  tall  and  brown  behind,  they  came  on  a 
narrow  track  that  led  off  towards  the  North.
A  new  Power  is 
rising.
Sharp-ears,  Wise-nose,  Swish-tail  and  Bumpkin, 

White-socks  my  little  lad,  and  old  Fatty  Lumpkin!
The  branches  of  the 
mallorn-tree  grew  out  nearly  straight  from  the  trunk,  and 
then  swept  upward;  but  near  the  top  the  main  stem  divided 
into  a  crown  of  many  boughs,  and  among  these  they  found 
that  there  had  been  built  a  wooden  platform,  or  jiet  as  such 
things  were  called  in  those  days:  the  Elves  called  it  a  talan.
Frodo  ran  to  the  eastern  window, 
and  found  himself  looking  into  a  kitchen-garden  grey  with 
dew.
They  didn’t  live 
in  these  darksome  holes  surely?’ 

‘These  are  not  holes,’  said  Gimli.
Or  so  says  the  heart  of  Gimli  the  Dwarf.
There  my  heart  is;  but  it  is  not  my  fate  to  sit  in 
peace,  even  in  the  fair  house  of  Elrond.’ 

The  hills  now  began  to  shut  them  in.
We 
discover  that  messengers  have  come  also  to  King  Brand  in 
Dale,  and  that  he  is  afraid.
The  lesser  rings  were 
only  essays  in  the  craft  before  it  was  full-grown,  and  to  the 
Elven-smiths  they  were  but  trifles  -  yet  still  to  my  mind 
dangerous  for  mortals.
With  a  bound  the  Balrog  leaped  full  upon  the  bridge.
We  might  reach  it  by  noon 
tomorrow,  if  we  go  straight  towards  it.
Slowly  the  sky  above 
grew  lighter,  and  then  suddenly  the  clouds  broke,  and  their 
draggled  fringes  trailed  away  northward  up  the  River.
‘But  you  see  further  ahead  in  the  clear 
light.
Whatever  danger  may 
beset  it,  the  Road  is  our  only  way  to  the  Ford.’ 

As  soon  as  they  had  eaten  they  set  out  again.
Arrows  whined 
and  whistled  down  the  corridor  as  he  sprang  back.
Stones  began  to  fall  from  the  mountain-side,  whist¬ 
ling  over  their  heads,  or  crashing  on  the  path  beside  them.
Tiniwiel  the  elven-fair, 

Immortal  maiden  elven-wise, 

About  him  cast  her  shadowy  hair 
And  arms  like  silver  glimmering.
It  leaned  over  him.
Even 
from  the  Eagles  of  the  Misty  Mountains  they  had  learned  no 
fresh  news.
Frodo  was  crushed  by  the  news.
The  village  of  Bree  had  some  hundred  stone  houses  of  the 
Big  Folic,  mostly  above  the  Road,  nestling  on  the  hillside  with 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY  197 

windows  looking  west.
Then  they  turned  a  shoulder  of  the  Downs  and  it  was 
hidden  from  view.
Then  with  a  rush  it  leaped  across  the 
fissure.
And  did 
you  not  see  and  recognize  the  ring  upon  my  finger?
In  that 
dusty  chamber  in  the  mountains  it  seemed  a  thousand  years 
ago  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  world.
There  was  another  long 
silence.
I  want  your  help  in 
something  urgent.
Sleep  well!’ 


Chapter  2 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


Next  day  Frodo  woke  early,  feeling  refreshed  and  well.
I  hope 
it’ll  be  like  The  Green  Dragon  away  back  home!
They  were  in 
a  deep  dim-lit  gully  over-arched  by  trees  high  above  them.
Tom  Bom,  jolly  Tom,  Tom  Bombadillo!
The  air  was  growing  very  warm  again.
We  fear  that  now  it  is 
inhabited  again,  and  with  power  sevenfold.
In  the  meanwhile  Frodo  and  Bilbo  sat  side  by  side,  and 
Sam  came  quickly  and  placed  himself  near  them.
When  they  saw  them  they  were  glad  that 
they  had  taken  his  advice:  the  windows  had  been  forced  open 
and  were  swinging,  and  the  curtains  were  flapping;  the  beds 
were  tossed  about,  and  the  bolsters  slashed  and  flung  upon 
the  floor;  the  brown  mat  was  torn  to  pieces.
Bilbo’s  going  off  has  been  heard  before 
tonight  in  Bree.
He  heard  himself  crying  out:  Never,  never!
But  it  was  not  an  echo,  for  when  they  halted  it 
pattered  on  for  a  little  all  by  itself,  and  then  grew  still.
His  legs  were  stretched  out  before  him,  showing  high 
boots  of  supple  leather  that  fitted  him  well,  but  had  seen 
much  wear  and  were  now  caked  with  mud.
But 
there  it  is:  you  can’t  wait  now  till  spring;  and  you  can’t  go  till 
the  reports  come  back.
They  seemed  to  him 
to  run  like  the  wind  and  to  grow  swiftly  larger  and  darker,  as 
their  courses  converged  with  his.
Be  sure  that  he  took  so  little  hurt  from  the  evil,  and 
escaped  in  the  end,  because  he  began  his  ownership  of  the 
Ring  so.
It  was  still  dark  in  the  room.
‘I  fear  that  the  burden 
is  laid  upon  you.
I  have  never  heard  before  of  Ores 


5i6 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


upon  Amon  Hen.
His  house  was  a  meeting  place  for 
the  idle,  talkative,  and  inquisitive  among  the  inhabitants,  large 
and  small,  of  the  four  villages;  and  a  resort  of  Rangers  and 
other  wanderers,  and  for  such  travellers  (mostly  dwarves)  as 
still  journeyed  on  the  East  Road,  to  and  from  the  Mountains.
‘They  are  coming!’  cried  Legolas.
To  take 
them  into  exile,  where  hunger  and  weariness  may  have  no 
cure,  is  quite  another  -  even  if  they  are  willing  to  come.
‘Thank  goodness  you  don’t  keep  any  boats  on  the  west- 
bank!’  said  Frodo.
For  my 
part  I  hope  never  to  look  upon  him  again;  but  Gandalf  came 
and  endured  long  speech  with  him.’ 

‘Yes,  long  and  weary,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘but  not  without 
profit.
Tom  Bombadil,  Tom  Bombadillo!
The  fire  burned  low,  and  the  last  faggot  was  thrown  on.
But  when  dark  things 
come  from  the  houseless  hills,  or  creep  from  sunless  woods, 
they  fly  from  us.
It  is 
a  great  water  before  it  finds  the  Sea.
He  hated  Bilbo  and  cursed 
his  name.
It  can  wait.’ 

He  went  on  with  his  tea.
We  may  join  with 


338 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


that  Power.
Always  after  a  defeat  and  a  respite, 
the  Shadow  takes  another  shape  and  grows  again.’ 

‘I  wish  it  need  not  have  happened  in  my  time,’  said  Frodo.
Then 
a  grip  stronger  and  colder  than  iron  seized  him.
Fail-  even  as  he  said  the  word  his  voice  faded  into  silence.
Following  Bilbo  was  uppermost  in  his 
mind,  and  the  one  thing  that  made  the  thought  of  leaving 
bearable.
Frodo’s  legs  ached.
It’s  near  sundown  already,  and  we  are 
going  to  have  our  supper;  for  we  mostly  go  to  bed  soon  after 
the  Sun.
It  don’t  look  like  a  cloud,’  said  Sam 
in  a  whisper  to  Aragorn.
You’ll  keep  an  eye  on  Frodo, 
won’t  you?’ 

‘Yes,  I  will  -  two  eyes,  as  often  as  I  can  spare  them.’ 

‘Fie  would  come  with  me,  of  course,  if  I  asked  him.
‘There  is  a  track,  and  it  leads  to  a  good  landing  that  is  still 
serviceable.
‘There  lies  the  fastness  of  Southern  Mirkwood,’  said 
Haldir.
In  the  late  afternoon  they  were  roused  by  the  watch, 
and  took  their  chief  meal:  cold  and  cheerless  as  a  rule,  for 
they  could  seldom  risk  the  lighting  of  a  fire.
‘Think,  if  you  can!
‘It  was  not  a  Balrog,’  said  Frodo,  still  shivering  with  the 
chill  that  had  come  upon  him.
You  need  not 
be  afraid  of  starving  before  winter  comes.
Run  naked  on  the  grass,  while  Tom  goes 
a-hunting!’ 

He  sprang  away  down  hill,  whistling  and  calling.
‘And  all  seemed  well  with  Bilbo.
But  you  must  stay  here  tonight.
But 
we  are  envying  Sam,  not  you.
But  there  was  so  much  at  stake 
that  I  had  to  take  some  risk  -  though  even  when  I  was  far 
away  there  has  never  been  a  day  when  the  Shire  has  not  been 
guarded  by  watchful  eyes.
As  soon  as  he  heard  the  voices  he  slipped  away.’ 

‘What  about  the  Elves?’  said  Sam,  too  excited  to  trouble 
about  the  rider.
Butterbur  paid  for  it 
himself,  and  offered  Merry  another  eighteen  pence  as  some 
compensation  for  the  lost  animals.
‘I  will  sleep  now,’  he  said;  and  the  Elf  led  him  to  a 
bower  beside  Pippin,  and  he  threw  himself  upon  a  bed  and 
fell  at  once  into  a  dreamless  slumber.
Is  it  not  so?
Some  advanced  almost  to  the  ring  of  stones.
But  I  found  nothing 
save  a  few  fugitives  from  the  South;  yet  it  seemed  to  me  that 
on  them  sat  a  fear  of  which  they  would  not  speak.
Ring  a  dong!
‘  “Saruman  the  White,”  answered  Radagast.
In  the  evening 
they  went  on  again,  always  as  nearly  southward  as  they  could 
find  a  way.
‘I  was  beginning  to  wonder  if 
you  would  turn  up  at  all  today,  and  I  was  just  going  back  to 
supper.
For  some  time 
they  had  been  silent,  moving  restlessly  about;  but  now  they 
were  sitting  in  a  circle,  and  they  were  talking.
In  the  dark  there  was  a 
snarling  noise.
But  I  would  welcome  your  company.’ 

‘But  we  have  no  need  of  other  company,  and  hobbits  are 
so  dull,’  they  laughed.
Merry  started,  noticing  the  stranger  for  the  first  time.
Now  you  should 
be  grateful,  for  I  do  not  give  this  counsel  gladly.
This  was  ridiculous.
Trem¬ 
bling  they  sprang  forward,  and  made  for  the  thickets  that  lay 
ahead.
‘The  time  has  come,’  he  said.
As  they  walked  up  the  green  path  from  the  gate  no  light 
was  visible;  the  windows  were  dark  and  shuttered.
The  air  was  gleaming  and  sunlit,  but  hazy;  and  they 
could  not  see  to  any  great  distance.
He  felt  sure 
they  would  smell  him  out  sooner  or  later.
I 
wish  I  had  come  back  sooner,  just  to  see  him  off.’ 

‘I  think  really  he  preferred  slipping  off  quietly  in  the  end,’ 
said  Gandalf.
‘Half  a  minute,  if  you  please!’  shouted  the  man  over  his 
shoulder,  and  vanished  into  a  babel  of  voices  and  a  cloud  of 
smoke.
‘If  you  can’t  distinguish 
between  a  Man  and  a  Hobbit,  your  judgement  is  poorer  than 
I  imagined.
I  was  peeping  through  into  the  road, 
after  the  S.-B.s  had  passed,  and  was  looking  straight  at  Bilbo 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED  137 

when  he  suddenly  reappeared.
I  thought  we  should  be  off  today.’  He 
rushed  to  the  camping  place,  fished  out  his  pack  from  the 
pile  where  Frodo  had  laid  it  when  he  emptied  the  boat  of  his 
companions’  goods,  grabbed  a  spare  blanket,  and  some  extra 
packages  of  food,  and  ran  back.
Obstinate  fool!
And  the  Dwarf,  hearing  the  names 
given  in  his  own  ancient  tongue,  looked  up  and  met  her  eyes; 
and  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  looked  suddenly  into  the  heart 
of  an  enemy  and  saw  there  love  and  understanding.
It  was  an  admirable  thing  and 
altogether  precious.
‘Do  you 
know  where  he  is,  or  what  he  is  doing?’ 

Strider  looked  grave.
Not  all  of  those  Southerners  mean  well;  and 
as  for  Ferny,  he  would  sell  anything  to  anybody;  or  make 
mischief  for  amusement.’ 

‘What  will  Ferny  sell,  and  what  has  my  accident  got  to  do 
with  him?’  said  Frodo,  still  determined  not  to  understand 
Strider’s  hints.
On 
it  roughly  cut  and  now  much  weathered  could  still  be  seen 
dwarf-runes  and  secret  marks.
‘Our  last  meal  at  Bag  End!’  said  Frodo,  pushing  back  his 
chair.
They  stopped  short 
suddenly.
There  were  also  many  other  things  to  fol¬ 
low,  and  when  they  had  finished  even  Fatty  Bolger  heaved  a 
sigh  of  content.
Old  Odo 
Proudfoot  removed  his  feet  from  the  table  and  stamped.
It’s  a  good  day  for  long  tales,  for  questions 
and  for  answers,  so  Tom  will  start  the  talking.’ 

He  then  told  them  many  remarkable  stories,  sometimes 
half  as  if  speaking  to  himself,  sometimes  looking  at  them 
suddenly  with  a  bright  blue  eye  under  his  deep  brows.
Each  of  the  hobbits  saw  in  his  mind  a  vision  of  the  cloaked 
and  booted  Riders.
Arwen  vanimelda,  namarie!
‘If  this  is  shelter,  then  one  wall 
and  no  roof  make  a  house.’ 

The  Company  now  gathered  together  as  close  to  the  cliff 
as  they  could.
Yet 
the  sound  blending  with  the  melody  seemed  to  shape  itself 
in  their  thought  into  words  which  they  only  partly  under¬ 
stood.
Night  slowly  passed.
‘I  am  afraid  Balin  is  buried  deep,  and  maybe  something 
else  is  buried  there  too.
‘So  that’s  where  that  southerner  is  hiding!’  he  thought.
‘But  if  I  was  in 
your  plight,  I  wouldn’t  take  up  with  a  Ranger.’ 

‘Then  who  would  you  take  up  with?’  asked  Strider.
252 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Again  she  fled,  but  swift  he  came.
I’ve  often  wanted  to  see  a  bit  of  magic  like  what  it  tells  of  in 
old  tales,  but  I’ve  never  heard  of  a  better  land  than  this.
The  elven-ship  in  haven  grey 
Beneath  the  mountain-lee 

Awaited  her  for  many  a  day 
Beside  the  roaring  sea.
He  imagined  suddenly  that  he  caught  a  muffled  cry,  and 
he  made  towards  it;  and  even  as  he  went  forward  the  mist  was 
rolled  up  and  thrust  aside,  and  the  starry  sky  was  unveiled.
Under  the  mail  there  was  a  shirt  of  soft 
leather,  but  at  one  point  the  rings  had  been  driven  through  it 
into  the  flesh.
The  path  dipped,  and  then  again  began  to  climb 
upwards,  leading  them  at  last  to  the  foot  of  the  steep  hillside.
Come  in!
‘But  lore  wanes  in 
Gondor,  Boromir,  if  in  the  city  of  those  who  once  were  wise 
they  now  speak  evil  of  Lothlorien.
I  have  crossed  many 
mountains  and  many  rivers,  and  trodden  many  plains,  even 
into  the  far  countries  of  Rhun  and  Flarad  where  the  stars  are 
strange.
‘We  must  do  without  hope,’ 
he  said.
Beside  the  falls  of  Nimrodel, 

By  water  clear  and  cool, 

Her  voice  as  falling  silver  fell 
Into  the  shining  pool.
I  feel  I  need  a  holiday,  a  very  long  holiday,  as 
I  have  told  you  before.
Frodo 
caught  his  glance  and  looked  away.
‘But  always  I  have  let  my  horn  cry 
at  setting  forth,  and  though  thereafter  we  may  walk  in  the 
shadows,  I  will  not  go  forth  as  a  thief  in  the  night.’ 

Gimli  the  dwarf  alone  wore  openly  a  short  shirt  of  steel- 
rings,  for  dwarves  make  light  of  burdens;  and  in  his  belt  was 
a  broad-bladed  axe.
They  could  hear 
few  words,  but  it  seemed  plain  to  them  that  the  song  was  a 
rain-song,  as  sweet  as  showers  on  dry  hills,  that  told  the  tale 
of  a  river  from  the  spring  in  the  highlands  to  the  Sea  far 
below.
‘This  is  the  great  realm 
and  city  of  the  Dwarrowdelf.
No  apparent  change  came  over  the  ring.
‘Say  rather  that  we  will  bear  our 
boats  by  the  ancient  way  to  Rauros-foot,  and  there  take  to 
the  water  again.
The  staff  broke  asunder  and 
fell  from  his  hand.
The  eastern  arch 
will  probably  prove  to  be  the  way  that  we  must  take;  but 
before  we  make  up  our  minds  we  ought  to  look  about  us.
By  that  time  the  whole  of  Bree  was  buzzing  with 
excitement.
Above 
it  the  stars  were  thick  in  the  dim  sky,  but  there  was  no  moon.
It  was  not  until  they  had  puffed  up  the  embers 
into  a  blaze  and  thrown  on  a  couple  of  faggots  that  they 
discovered  Strider  had  come  with  them.
I  stayed  indoors  for  an  hour.
You  may  meet  a  friend  of  mine  on  the  Road:  a  Man,  lean,  dark, 
tall,  by  some  called  Strider.
‘There  lie  the  woods  of  Lothlorien!’  said  Legolas.
Legolas  shot  two  through  the  throat.
Before  them  a  wide  grey  shadow  loomed,  and  they  heard  an 
endless  rustle  of  leaves  like  poplars  in  the  breeze.
Legolas  turned  and  set  an  arrow  to  the  string,  though  it 
was  a  long  shot  for  his  small  bow.
He  re¬ 
membered  the  rhyme  that  Tom  had  taught  them.
‘I  hope  not,  indeed,’  said  Butterbur.
Behind  it  rose  the  first  gentle  slopes  of  the  hill  clad  with  trees, 
and  trees  marched  away  westward  along  the  curving  shores 
of  the  lake.
Then,  if  you  please,  Mr.
Make  way  for  Frodo,  Lord  of  the  Ring!’ 

‘Hush!’  said  Gandalf  from  the  shadows  at  the  back  of  the 
porch.
‘I  felt  something  in  my  sleep.
It  was  dreary  and  cold.
Isildur 
took  it!
Strider  may  have  an  honest  reason  for  spying  and 
eavesdropping;  but  if  so,  I  should  advise  him  to  explain  it.
Bill  the 
pony  stood  patiently  but  dejectedly  in  front  of  the  hobbits, 
and  screened  them  a  little;  but  before  long  the  drifting  snow 
was  above  his  hocks,  and  it  went  on  mounting.
‘All  the  “great  secrets”  under  the  mountains  had  turned 
out  to  be  just  empty  night:  there  was  nothing  more  to  find  out, 
nothing  worth  doing,  only  nasty  furtive  eating  and  resentful 
remembering.
Their  legs  seemed  leaden.
The  spray  of  it  half  blinded  the  Company  as  they  crouched 
against  the  cliff,  and  when  the  air  cleared  again  they  saw  that 
the  path  was  blocked  behind  them.
A  decent  respectable  hobbit  was  Mr.
I  must  rest  here  a  moment,  even  if  all  the  ores 
ever  spawned  are  after  us.’ 

Gimli  took  his  arm  and  helped  him  down  to  a  seat  on  the 
step.
We  might  make  him 
useful.
He  looked  up,  sniffing  the  air.
The  wind  began  to  blow  steadily  out  of  the  West 
and  pour  the  water  of  the  distant  seas  on  the  dark  heads  of 
the  hills  in  fine  drenching  rain.
Bilbo  the  silly  hobbit  started  this  affair,  and  Bilbo  had  better 
finish  it,  or  himself.
They 
quickly  decided  to  leave  Weathertop  as  soon  as  possible.
Drogo 
was  his  second  cousin.
Butterbur,  who  thus  got  five  good  beasts 
at  a  very  fair  price.
As  dusk  drew  down  on  the  fourth  day,  he  was  looking 
back  over  the  bowed  heads  of  Frodo  and  Aragorn  and  the 
following  boats;  he  was  drowsy  and  longed  for  camp  and  the 
feel  of  earth  under  his  toes.
‘For  mithril ,’  answered  Gandalf.
As 
they  journeyed  the  sun  mounted,  and  grew  hot.
There  the  portage-way,  turning  back  to  the  water-side,  ran 
gently  down  to  the  shallow  edge  of  a  little  pool.
Gimli  took  up  one  of  the 
cakes  and  looked  at  it  with  a  doubtful  eye.
And  what  else  can  I  do?’ 

Slowly  he  drew  out  the  Ring  and  put  it  on  once  more.
But  I 
said  to  myself:  “After  all  he  comes  of  a  long-lived  family  on 
his  mother’s  side.
Power  to  defy  our  Enemy  is  not 
in  him,  unless  such  power  is  in  the  earth  itself.
To  them  he  was  just  one 
of  the  ‘attractions’  at  the  Party.
Bilbo  was  very  rich  and  very  peculiar,  and  had  been  the 
wonder  of  the  Shire  for  sixty  years,  ever  since  his  remarkable 
disappearance  and  unexpected  return.
He  said  it  came  from  his  grandmother,  who 
had  lots  of  beautiful  things  of  that  kind.
He  planted  his  feet  firmly  apart,  and 
laid  his  hand  upon  the  haft  of  his  axe.
An  account  to  the  Ring-bearer  of 
so  strange  an  event  was  required,  I  think.
I  should  like 
another  look.
‘Your 
pardon!’  he  said,  bowing  low.
One  will  keep  a 
traveller  on  his  feet  for  a  day  of  long  labour,  even  if  he  be 
one  of  the  tall  Men  of  Minas  Tirith.’ 

The  Elves  next  unwrapped  and  gave  to  each  of  the  Com¬ 
pany  the  clothes  they  had  brought.
Keep  the  boats  in  line, 


512  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

and  as  far  apart  as  you  can!
‘No.
I  heard 
news  of  them  only  after  I  left  you  in  June;  but  that  story  must 
wait.
The  desire  to  do  this 
laid  hold  of  him,  and  he  could  think  of  nothing  else.
Do  you  wish  for  the 
House  of  Elendil  to  return  to  the  Land  of  Gondor?’ 

‘I  was  not  sent  to  beg  any  boon,  but  to  seek  only  the 
meaning  of  a  riddle,’  answered  Boromir  proudly.
For  an  instant  the  wizard  looked  out.
If  I  had,  I 
should  never  have  gone  to  Isengard,  or  I  should  have  gone 
more  warily.
I  have  been  dream¬ 
ing.
The  others  swung  round  and  saw  the  waters  of 
the  lake  seething,  as  if  a  host  of  snakes  were  swimming  up 
from  the  southern  end.
‘And  so  I  have  been  sent  at  last  by  Dain  to  warn  Bilbo  that 
he  is  sought  by  the  Enemy,  and  to  learn,  if  may  be,  why  he 
desires  this  ring,  this  least  of  rings.
Indeed,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  disturbing  events  of  the 


238 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


night  before,  they  would  have  enjoyed  this  part  of  the  journey 
better  than  any  up  to  that  time.
The 
wind  seemed  to  be  curling  round  the  house  and  shaking  it; 
and  far  off  he  heard  a  horn  blowing  wildly.
Jolly  old  Frodo,’  from  the 
juniors.
The  farmer  laughed.
They  could  all  see  the  black  specks, 
but  neither  Frodo  nor  Merry  could  make  out  their  shapes  for 
certain;  yet  something  told  them  that  there,  far  below,  were 
Black  Riders  assembling  on  the  Road  beyond  the  foot  of  the 
hill.
Gimli  and  Frodo  were  at  the  rear,  walking  softly  and  not 
speaking,  listening  for  any  sound  upon  the  road  behind.
Fatty  Bolger  opened 
the  door  cautiously  and  peered  out.
‘You  see?
Swords  lay  by  their  sides,  and  shields  were  at  their  feet.
‘Come  on  now,  master,  sing  us  something  that  we 
haven’t  heard  before!’ 

For  a  moment  Frodo  stood  gaping.
Nothing  could  be  seen  all  round  the  house  but 
falling  water.
‘We  may  remain  there  for  a  while  and  make  a  brave  stand; 
but  the  Lord  Denethor  and  all  his  men  cannot  hope  to  do 
what  even  Elrond  said  was  beyond  his  power:  either  to  keep 
the  Burden  secret,  or  to  hold  off  the  full  might  of  the  Enemy 
when  he  comes  to  take  it.
And  I  might  say  it  to  others,’  he  added  with  a  look  at 
the  stranger  and  the  miller.
The 
Sickle*  was  swinging  bright  above  the  shoulders  of  Bree-hill.
The  Sundering  Seas  between  them  lay, 

And  yet  at  last  they  met  once  more, 

And  long  ago  they  passed  away 
In  the  forest  singing  sorrowless.
I  would  dearly 
like  to  hear  more  about  Elves;  the  dark  seems  to  press  round 
so  close.’ 

‘I  will  tell  you  the  tale  of  Tinuviel,’  said  Strider,  ‘in  brief - 
for  it  is  a  long  tale  of  which  the  end  is  not  known;  and  there 
are  none  now,  except  Elrond,  that  remember  it  aright  as  it 
was  told  of  old.
‘  “Be  off!”  I  said.
The  night  grew 
deadly  dark  under  great  clouds.
I  don’t  know  of  what:  not  of 
wolves,  or  the  dark  behind  the  doors,  but  of  something  else.
The  Elves  may 
fear  the  Dark  Lord,  and  they  may  fly  before  him,  but  never 
again  will  they  listen  to  him  or  serve  him.
Turning  aside,  she  led  them  towards  the  southern  slopes 
of  the  hill  of  Caras  Galadhon,  and  passing  through  a  high 
green  hedge  they  came  into  an  enclosed  garden.
‘There  we  had  rumour  of  him,  and  we 
guess  that  he  dwelt  there  long  in  the  dark  hills;  but  we  never 
found  him,  and  at  last  I  despaired.
But  there  were  several  questions 
asked  that  made  Frodo  a  little  uneasy.
He  has  led  us  in  here  against 
our  fears,  but  he  will  lead  us  out  again,  at  whatever  cost  to 
himself.
The  sons  of  Elrond, 
Elladan  and  Elrohir,  were  the  last  to  return;  they  had  made  a 
great  journey,  passing  down  the  Silverlode  into  a  strange 
country,  but  of  their  errand  they  would  not  speak  to  any  save 
to  Elrond.
The  cold  hour  before  dawn  was  passing.
When  they  had  finished,  the  farmer  and  his  sons  went  out 
with  a  lantern  and  got  the  waggon  ready.
As  Sam,  the  last  of  the  Company,  led  Bill  up  on  to  the  dry 
ground  on  the  far  side,  there  came  a  soft  sound:  a  swish, 
followed  by  a  plop,  as  if  a  fish  had  disturbed  the  still  surface 
of  the  water.
The  cliff  towered  into  the  night,  the  countless  stars 
were  kindled,  the  wind  blew  cold,  and  the  doors  stood  fast.
At  least  one  set  was 
made,  only  a  day  or  two  ago,  by  heavy  boots.
Baggins  of  Bag  End,  and  he’s  only  just  gone.
You  should  see  the  stone- 
paved  roads  of  many  colours!
‘Only  thrice  have  you  set 
the  Ring  upon  your  finger  since  you  knew  what  you  pos¬ 
sessed.
There’s  been  a  strange  customer 
asking  for  Mr.
A  yellow  noon  lay  on  the  green  land  of  the  Tongue, 
and  the  water  glittered  with  silver.
So  they  passed  into  the 
dark  chasm  of  the  Gates.
‘We  thought  you  had  gone  to  find  some,’  said  Pippin,  busy 
setting  out  the  food,  and  cups.
Me  and  my  folk’ll  keep 
watch  tonight;  but  you  had  best  get  some  sleep,  if  you  can.’ 

‘In  any  case  we  must  be  called  at  dawn,’  said  Frodo.
I  will  begin  with  you.’ 

He  lifted  up  the  hobbit.
He  welcomed  all  the  callers,  but  he  had 
not  much  more  to  say  than  before.
Sam  and  Frodo  were  only  a  few 
steps  up,  and  Gandalf  had  just  begun  to  climb,  when  the 
groping  tentacles  writhed  across  the  narrow  shore  and  fin¬ 
gered  the  cliff-wall  and  the  doors.
I  stood  alone  on 
an  island  in  the  clouds;  and  I  had  no  chance  of  escape,  and 
my  days  were  bitter.
Frodo.
‘I  made  that  up  myself,’  he  whispered  to  Frodo,  ‘for  the 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


323 


Dunadan,  a  long  time  ago  when  he  first  told  me  about  him¬ 
self.
In  winter 
here  no  heart  could  mourn  for  summer  or  for  spring.
‘Lothlorien!’  said  Aragorn.
I  durstn’t  go  outside  this  dell  for  any  money;  I  felt  that  some¬ 
thing  was  creeping  up  the  slope.’ 

‘Did  you  see  anything?’  asked  Frodo,  springing  to  his  feet.
They  are  coming  this  way,’  said  Frodo.
Sheep 
were  bleating  in  flocks.
‘The  power  of  their  master  is  in  them,  and  they  stand  or  fall 
by  him.
‘Simply  afraid.
Frodo!’ 

‘Me,  sir!’  cried  Sam,  springing  up  like  a  dog  invited  for  a 
walk.
You  are  come  to  Cerin  Amroth,’  said  Haldir.
They  will  drive  these  wretches  to  some  evil 
work:  Ferny,  and  some  of  the  strangers,  and,  maybe,  the 
gatekeeper  too.
His  breath  was  smoking,  and  the  darkness  was 
less  near  and  thick.
But  against  Minas 
Tirith  was  set  another  fortress,  greater  and  more  strong.
Then 
the  sun  gleamed  out  of  ragged  clouds  again  and  the  rain 
lessened.
‘I  am  learning  a  lot  about  Sam 
Gamgee  on  this  journey.
But  they  saw  little  of  the  country,  for 
they  journeyed  mostly  by  night  and  twilight,  resting  by  day, 
and  lying  as  hidden  as  the  land  allowed.
It  was  indeed  a  kingly  gift.
I 
might  have  been  more  careful  on  the  road.’ 

‘Still,  there  may  be  no  connexion  between  this  rider  and 
the  Gaffer’s  stranger,’  said  Pippin.
Radagast  the  Fool!
The  colour  had  come  back  to  his  face,  and  his 
eyes  were  clear,  and  fully  awake  and  aware.
There  was  a  tearing  creak  and  the  other  crack  split  open, 
and  out  of  it  Pippin  sprang,  as  if  he  had  been  lucked.
And  well  is  it  that  not  until  this  year,  this  very 
summer,  as  it  seems,  did  he  learn  the  full  truth.
‘At  sunrise  I  escaped  and  fled  towards  the  north.
It  would  possess  him.
‘Our  peril  will  be  greatest  just  ere  we  reach  the  river,’  said 
Glorfindel;  ‘for  my  heart  warns  me  that  the  pursuit  is  now 
swift  behind  us,  and  other  danger  may  be  waiting  by  the 
Ford.’ 

The  Road  was  still  running  steadily  downhill,  and  there 
was  now  in  places  much  grass  at  either  side,  in  which  the 
hobbits  walked  when  they  could,  to  ease  their  tired  feet.
There  was  another  smaller 
door  on  the  other  side  of  the  chamber,  under  the  shaft.
‘What  was 
the  thing,  or  were  there  many  of  them?’ 

‘I  do  not  know,’  answered  Gandalf;  ‘but  the  arms  were  all 
guided  by  one  purpose.
The  cut  is 
not  poisoned,  as  the  wounds  of  ore-blades  too  often  are.
With  a  terrible  cry  the  Balrog  fell  forward,  and  its  shadow 
plunged  down  and  vanished.
Who  now  would 
know?
‘Only  once  before  have  I  seen  them  from  afar  in  waking 
life,  but  I  know  them  and  their  names,  for  under  them  lies 
Khazad-dum,  the  Dwarrowdelf,  that  is  now  called  the  Black 
Pit,  Moria  in  the  Elvish  tongue.
The  banquet  was  very  splendid,  however, 
though  I  had  a  bad  cold  at  the  time,  I  remember,  and  could  only 
say  ‘thag you  very  buch’.
I  reckon  it  was  one  of  the  Big 
Folk  from  foreign  parts.
I  thought  you  would  go  after  him  sooner 
or  later;  indeed  I  expected  you  to  go  sooner,  and  lately  we 
have  been  very  anxious.
‘Don’t  let  him  hurt 
me,  sir!
In  all  the  long  wars  with  the  Dark  Tower  treason  has  ever 
been  our  greatest  foe.
Boromir  had  a  long 
sword,  in  fashion  like  Anduril  but  of  less  lineage,  and  he  bore 
also  a  shield  and  his  war-horn.
I 
wonder  what  that  means.
‘Come  now  with  your  friends  and  join  our  company!
The  sound  of  Sam  Gamgee  cutting  the  lawn  came 
in  from  the  garden.
I’ll  do  my  best 
to  finish  my  book  before  you  return.
‘ProudFEETl’  shouted  an 
elderly  hobbit  from  the  back  of  the  pavilion.
Its  strength, 
Boromir,  is  too  great  for  anyone  to  wield  at  will,  save  only 
those  who  have  already  a  great  power  of  their  own.
Merry!’  he  cried.
At  length  he 
gathered  from  Sam  that  they  had  seen  nothing  but  the  vague 
shadowy  shapes  coming  towards  them.
What  hope 
have  we  without  you?’ 

He  turned  to  the  Company.
There  was  no  willow-tree  to  be 
seen.
‘That  is  plain  enough,’  said  Gimli.
The  shades  of  evening 
began  to  fall,  and  it  grew  cold.
I  don’t  know  in  the  least  how 
far  down  the  Withywindle  we  are,  or  who  could  possibly 
come  here  often  enough  to  make  a  path  along  it.
It  is  miruvor,  the  cordial  of  Imladris.
‘I  do  not  wish  to  go,’  he  said;  ‘but  neither  do  I 
wish  to  refuse  the  advice  of  Gandalf.
The  clouds  vanished  southwards 
and  the  sky  was  opened,  high  and  blue.
‘What’s  wrong  with  old  Maggot?’  asked  Pippin.
‘All  aboard,  Sam?’  said  Frodo.
Fire  came  from  its  nostrils.
We  will  go  that  way,  if  we  get  a  chance.’ 

Another  harsh  horn-call  and  shrill  cries  rang  out.
The  moon  shone  in  your  hair.’ 

Gandalf  paused  astonished  and  looked  at  him.
He  lived  alone,  as  Bilbo  had  done;  but  he  had  a  good 
many  friends,  especially  among  the  younger  hobbits  (mostly 
descendants  of  the  Old  Took)  who  had  as  children  been  fond 
of  Bilbo  and  often  in  and  out  of  Bag  End.
He  found  himself 
stiffening,  as  if  for  a  final  spring;  he  no  longer  felt  limp  like  a 
helpless  prey.
There 
was  a  frost  in  the  air,  and  the  sky  was  a  pale  clear  blue.
It  was  dark.
They  put  out  the  fire  and  hid  all  traces  of  it.
.
I  still  marvel 
that  you  are  alive  at  all.’  Gently  he  stripped  off  Frodo’s 
old  jacket  and  worn  tunic,  and  gave  a  gasp  of  wonder.
His  head  had  nodded.
We  are  on  the  wrong  side!’ 

‘Look  ahead!’  called  Gandalf.
I  shall  need  my 
arms,’  he  said  and  strode  forward.
He 
had  begun  to  shake  off  the  terror  of  the  clutching  arm,  and 
suddenly  he  felt  extremely  hungry.
After  they  had  eaten,  Goldberry  sang  many  songs  for  them, 
songs  that  began  merrily  in  the  hills  and  fell  softly  down  into 
silence;  and  in  the  silences  they  saw  in  their  minds  pools  and 
waters  wider  than  any  they  had  known,  and  looking  into  them 
they  saw  the  sky  below  them  and  the  stars  like  jewels  in  the 
depths.
We  must  have  a  talk.’ 

They  went  into  the  farmer’s  kitchen,  and  sat  by  the  wide 
fire-place.
But  that  was  not  fast  enough.
That  was 
now  a  good  while  ago.
Frodo  peering  forward  saw  in  the  distance  two  great  rocks 
approaching:  like  great  pinnacles  or  pillars  of  stone  they 
seemed.
The  ground 
was  fairly  level,  and  there  was  little  undergrowth;  but  the 
trees  were  too  close  for  them  to  see  far  ahead.
His  task,  according  to  the  original  plans  of  the  conspirators, 
was  to  stay  behind  and  deal  with  inquisitive  folk,  and  to  keep 
up  as  long  as  possible  the  pretence  that  Mr.
A  deep  loneliness  and  sense 
of  loss  was  on  them.
It  was  dimly  lit, 
but  to  their  eyes,  after  so  long  a  time  in  the  dark,  it  seemed 
dazzlingly  bright,  and  they  blinked  as  they  entered.
Nevertheless  its  folk  are  seldom  seen,  and  maybe  they 
dwell  now  deep  in  the  woods  and  far  from  the  northern 
border.’ 

‘Indeed  deep  in  the  wood  they  dwell,’  said  Aragorn,  and 
sighed  as  if  some  memory  stirred  in  him.
Just  as  they  felt  their  feet  slowing  down  to  a  standstill,  they 
noticed  that  the  ground  was  gently  rising.
The  noon-bell  rang.
A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


407 


It  was  after  nightfall  when  they  had  entered  the  Mines.
It  cannot  yet  have  perished;  for  light  boats 
used  to  journey  out  of  Wilderland  down  to  Osgiliath,  and  still 
did  so  until  a  few  years  ago,  when  the  Ores  of  Mordor  began 
to  multiply.’ 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


509 


‘Seldom  in  my  life  has  any  boat  come  out  of  the  North,  and 
the  Ores  prowl  on  the  east-shore,’  said  Boromir.
The  cakes  will  keep  sweet 
for  many  many  days,  if  they  are  unbroken  and  left  in  their 
leaf-wrappings,  as  we  have  brought  them.
And  that  might 
be  true  enough;  for  as  like  as  not  it  is  old  Mr.
The  Shannon  had  been  dammed  and 
had  filled  all  the  valley.
“For 
to  me  what  was  is  less  dark  than  what  is  to  come,  and  that  is 
my  care.
The  wind  was  still.
’ 

He  fell  silent  and  shut  his  eyes.
‘If  you  wish  to  know,  I  will  tell  you  that  these  doors  open 
outwards.
Echoes  ran  along  as  they  hurried  forward;  and  there 
seemed  to  be  a  sound  of  many  footfalls  following  their  own.
Out  from  the  water  a  long  sinuous  tentacle  had  crawled;  it 
was  pale-green  and  luminous  and  wet.
Ring  a  ding  dillo 
del!
‘I  can  carry  enough  for  two,’  said  Sam  defiantly.
‘I 
know  that  haste  is  needed,  yet  I  cannot  choose.
Here  is  a  scholar  in  the  Ancient  Tongue.
Shrivel  like  the  cold  mist,  like  the  winds  go  wailing, 

Out  into  the  barren  lands  far  beyond  the  mountains!
For  DORA  BAGGINS  in  memory  of  a  LONG  correspon¬ 
dence,  with  love  from  Bilbo;  on  a  large  waste-paper  basket.
For 
the  black  horses  can  see,  and  the  Riders  can  use  men  and 
other  creatures  as  spies,  as  we  found  at  Bree.
‘That  was  the  undoing  of  Saruman’s  plot.
Nothing  was 
to  be  seen  moving  on  the  hill.
One 
of  the  travellers,  a  squint-eyed  ill-favoured  fellow,  was  fore¬ 
telling  that  more  and  more  people  would  be  coming  north  in 
the  near  future.
‘I  saw  him,  Mr.
‘I  cannot  say,’  answered  Gandalf.
That  venture  is  desperate:  as 
much  so  for  eight  as  for  three  or  two,  or  one  alone.
‘An  account 
of  your  performance  would  be  very  interesting  to  certain 
people.
He 
went  out  and  walked  down  to  the  gate  at  the  bottom  of  the 
path,  and  then  on  a  short  way  down  the  Hill  Road.
When  the  Enemy  re¬ 
turned  our  folk  were  driven  from  Ithilien,  our  fair  domain  east 
of  the  River,  though  we  kept  a  foothold  there  and  strength  of 
arms.
We  are  horribly  afraid  - 
but  we  are  coming  with  you;  or  following  you  like  hounds.’ 

‘And  after  all,  sir,’  added  Sam,  ‘you  did  ought  to  take  the 
Elves’  advice.
They  looked  back,  but  the  turn  of  the  road  prevented  them 
from  seeing  far.
It’s  hard  work  for  two  legs,  but  I  don’t  get 
thinner.
‘They  all  resolved  to  go  forward,’  said 
Galadriel  looking  in  their  eyes.
Where  is  the  pale  king?’  he  asked 
wildly.
Sad 
and  sweet  was  the  sound  of  her  voice  in  the  cool  clear  air: 

I  sang  of  leaves,  of  leaves  of  gold,  and  leaves  of  gold  there 
grew: 

Of  wind  I  sang,  a  wind  there  came  and  in  the  branches  blew.
As  far  as  they 
could  judge  it  went  in  great  mounting  curves,  and  as  it  rose 
it  grew  loftier  and  wider.
‘Tell  Gandalf  to  hurry  along  the 
East  Road:  we  shall  soon  be  back  on  it  and  going  as  fast  as 
we  can.’  ‘Good-bye!’  they  cried,  and  rode  down  the  slope 
and  disappeared  from  Fredegar’s  sight  into  the  tunnel.
He  alone  stood  by  his  father  in  that  last  mortal  contest;  and 
by  Gil-galad  only  Cirdan  stood,  and  I.
Before  today  is  over  we  ought  to  find 
the  Great  Gates  and  see  the  waters  of  Mirrormere  lying  in 
the  Dimrill  Dale  before  us.’ 

‘I  shall  be  glad,’  said  Gimli.
That 
spear-thrust  would  have  skewered  a  wild  boar!’ 

Well,  it  did  not  skewer  me,  I  am  glad  to  say,’  said  Frodo; 
‘though  I  feel  as  if  I  had  been  caught  between  a  hammer  and 
an  anvil.’  He  said  no  more.
‘Pippin  and  Merry  next.
Frodo  crouching 
over  his  knees  heard  Sam  in  front  muttering  and  groaning: 
‘What  a  place!
Who  knows  which  side  now  the  marshals  of  the 
Horse-lords  serve?’ 

Who  knows  indeed!’  said  Gandalf.
Say  nothing  to 
the  others,  I  beg,  not  until  it  is  plain  that  there  is  no  other 
way.’ 

‘We  must  decide  before  we  go  further,’  answered  Gandalf.
Then  with  a  dart  he  sprang  to  the 
sill,  and  thrust  a  long  arm  out  and  downwards.
I  will  tell  you  what  I  know,  and 
leave  the  reward  to  you.
They  are  gone.
Aragorn  was  the  tallest  of  the  Company,  but  Boromir,  little 
less  in  height,  was  broader  and  heavier  in  build.
‘That  does  not  sound  like  a  Black  Rider’s  horse!’  said 
Frodo,  listening  intently.
It  rent  the  night  like  fire  on  a  hill-top.
‘A  stout  little  fellow  with  red  cheeks ,’  said  Mr.
Gimli  was  busy  with  a  small 
fire  near  at  hand.
The  wood  stood 
all  round  the  hill  like  thick  hair  that  ended  sharply  in  a  circle 
round  a  shaven  crown.
‘I  was  the  herald  of  Gil-galad  and  marched  with  his  host.
The  room  was  very  quiet  and  still,  and  the 
light  seemed  to  have  grown  dim.
‘And  that  is  what  he  is 
worrying  about,  I  am  sure.
With  that  power 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


I  should  have  power  too  great  and  terrible.
He 
wished  he  was  far  away.
He’s  off  to  his  home,  as  he  always  said;  and  no 
blame  to  him.
The  morning  dawned  bright  and  fair;  the  air  was  clean, 
and  the  light  pale  and  clear  in  a  rain-washed  sky.
And 
why  on  earth  did  we  behave  so  foolishly:  we  ought  to  have 
stayed  quiet  in  here.’ 

‘It  would  have  been  better,’  said  Strider.
Loth  was  my  father  to  give  me  leave,  and  long  have 
I  wandered  by  roads  forgotten,  seeking  the  house  of  Elrond, 
of  which  many  had  heard,  but  few  knew  where  it  lay.’ 

‘And  here  in  the  house  of  Elrond  more  shall  be  made  clear 
to  you,’  said  Aragorn,  standing  up.
After  an  hour  or  two  they  had  lost  all  clear  sense  of  direc¬ 
tion,  though  they  knew  well  enough  that  they  had  long  ceased 
to  go  northward  at  all.
‘It’s  a  shame  to  wake  you,’  whispered 
Sam,  ‘but  that’s  what  you  said.
But 
what  can  have  happened  to  Gandalf  ?
That’s  Stick-at- 
naught  Strider,  that  is!
Sam  will.
Off  you  go,  all  of  you,  down  the  stairs!
Frodo  was  neither  very  fat  nor  very 
timid;  indeed,  though  he  did  not  know  it,  Bilbo  (and 
Gandalf)  had  thought  him  the  best  hobbit  in  the  Shire.
The  fall  of  the  hoofs  sounded  loud  in 
the  still,  foggy  air.
‘It  is  not  your  watch.’ 

‘I  do  not  know,’  answered  Aragorn;  ‘but  a  shadow  and  a 
threat  has  been  growing  in  my  sleep.
In  spite  of  all  the  danger  and  worry  I  must  go  to  bed,  or 
sleep  where  I  sit.
He  rose  clumsily  and  bowed  in  dwarf-fashion,  saying:  ‘Y et 


464  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

more  fair  is  the  living  land  of  Lorien,  and  the  Lady  Galadriel 
is  above  all  the  jewels  that  lie  beneath  the  earth!’ 

There  was  a  silence.
‘In  the  house  of  Elrond,  and  it  is  ten  o’clock  in  the  morn¬ 
ing,’  said  a  voice.
They  threw  their  packs  on 
board  and  climbed  in.
For  Isildur  did  not  march  away 
straight  from  the  war  in  Mordor,  as  some  have  told  the  tale.’ 

‘Some  in  the  North,  maybe,’  Boromir  broke  in.
Here 
we  will  stay  awhile,  and  come  to  the  city  of  the  Galadhrim 
at  dusk.’ 

The  others  cast  themselves  down  upon  the  fragrant  grass, 
but  Frodo  stood  awhile  still  lost  in  wonder.
I  reckon  we  may  go  a  good 
deal  further  and  see  naught  better,  nor  queerer.
He  came  to  the  edge  of 
the  lawn  of  Parth  Galen  by  the  shore,  where  the  boats  were 
drawn  up  out  of  the  water.
In  fact,  it  is  partly  about  that  that  I  have 
come  to  say  a  last  word.’ 

‘Well,  what  about  it?’ 

‘What  do  you  know  already?’ 

‘Only  what  Bilbo  told  me.
But  I’ve  been  thinking  since, 
and  now  I’m  not  so  sure.
‘ Elendil /’  he  shouted.
The  young  hobbits  stared  at  the  door  in 
vain  for  a  while,  and  then  made  off,  feeling  that  the  day  of 
the  party  would  never  come.
‘One  for  the  Shire!’  cried  Aragorn.
Not  knowing  what  else  to  do,  he  crawled 
away  under  the  tables  to  the  dark  corner  by  Strider,  who  sat 
unmoved,  giving  no  sign  of  his  thoughts.
And  that’s  why  I  choked:  which  you  heard 
seemingly.
In  the 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


89 


evening  Frodo  gave  his  farewell  feast:  it  was  quite  small,  just 
a  dinner  for  himself  and  his  four  helpers;  but  he  was  troubled 
and  felt  in  no  mood  for  it.
‘Well,’  said  Sam,  ‘you  can’t  see  nobody  working  it.
‘But  the  time  is 
near  when  it  shall  be  forged  anew.’ 

Sam  said  nothing.
He  was  standing  between 
the  two  trees  gazing  at  the  blank  wall  of  the  cliff,  as  if  he 
would  bore  a  hole  into  it  with  his  eyes.
Wisps 
of  dark  smoke  wavered  in  the  hot  air.
The  Twenty-first  Hall  should 
be  on  the  Seventh  Level,  that  is  six  above  the  level  of  the 
Gates.
Not  yet.
‘So  be  it,’  he  said.
‘From  signs  that  we  have  seen  lately,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘I  fear 
that  the  Redhorn  Gate  may  be  watched;  and  also  I  have 
doubts  of  the  weather  that  is  coming  up  behind.
He  was  laughing!
I  was  watching  them.
Sleep  till  the  morning-light,  rest  on  the  pillow!
Frodo.
‘Will  they  attack  the  inn?’ 

‘No,  I  think  not,’  said  Strider.
Get  inside,  and 
be  quick!’ 

Merry  and  Fatty  went  into  the  kitchen  on  the  other  side  of 
the  passage,  and  busied  themselves  with  the  final  preparations 
for  a  late  supper.
Suddenly  coming  out  of  a 
belt  of  fir-trees  it  ran  steeply  down  a  slope,  and  turned  sharply 
to  the  left  round  the  corner  of  a  rocky  shoulder  of  the  hill.
So  now,  when  its  master  was  awake  once  more  and  sending 
out  his  dark  thought  from  Mirkwood,  it  abandoned  Gollum.
They  made  their  way  slowly  and  cautiously  round  the 
south-western  slopes  of  the  hill,  and  came  in  a  little  while  to 
the  edge  of  the  Road.
‘So  you  know  about  our  little  footpad, 
do  you?
Do  you  wish  them  to  find  you?
He  thinks  less  than  he  talks,  and  slower;  yet  he 
can  see  through  a  brick  wall  in  time  (as  they  say  in  Bree).
He  drew 
out  Sting:  it  flashed  and  glittered  like  a  blue  flame;  and  then 
slowly  faded  again  and  grew  dull.
Sam  Gamgee  was  sitting  in  one  corner  near  the  fire,  and 
opposite  him  was  Ted  Sandyman,  the  miller’s  son;  and  there 
were  various  other  rustic  hobbits  listening  to  their  talk.
Boromir  and  Aragorn  slew  many.
‘I  said  not  so;  yet  evil  came,’  answered  Legolas  sadly.
Frodo  half  expected  to  see  the  small  distant 
figure  of  a  horseman  on  the  ridge  dark  against  the  sky;  but 
there  was  no  sign  of  one.
Last  came 
Aragorn  carrying  Frodo.
Neither  sky  nor  sunset  was  reflected 
on  its  sullen  surface.
‘I  hear  all  lands  of  news,  from  over  the  Mountains,  and 
out  of  the  South,  but  hardly  anything  from  the  Shire.
‘As  I  stood  there  I  could  hear  orc-voices  on  the  other  side: 
at  any  moment  I  thought  they  would  burst  it  open.
If  Aragorn 
and  Legolas  will  guard  him,  and  answer  for  him,  he  shall 
pass;  but  he  must  go  blindfold  through  Lothlorien.
I  see  yellow  cream  and 
honeycomb,  and  white  bread,  and  butter;  milk,  cheese,  and 
green  herbs  and  ripe  berries  gathered.
Then  he  shut  it 
quietly  and  sat  down  again.
There  is  no  barrow  on  Weathertop,  nor  on  any  of 
these  hills,’  answered  Strider.
Mr.
Baggins  -  Underhill,  I  should  say!
O!
Went  this  morning,  and 
my  Sam  went  with  him:  anyway  all  his  stuff  went.
Suddenly 
in  the  distance  the  S.-B.s  appeared,  coming  towards  us.
You  hardly  feel  any  weight  when  you  put  it  on.’ 

‘I  should  look  -  well,  I  don’t  think  I  should  look  right  in  it,’ 
said  Frodo.
He  knows  where  Isildur  fell.
‘There’s  some  devilry  at  work  in  the  Shire,’  he  said.
The  banks  began  to  rise  and  grow  stony.
‘Let  us 
look  ourselves  once,  ere  we  go!’ 

They  stooped  over  the  dark  water.
I’ve  never  seen  or  felt  anything  like  it  in  the 
Shire  before.’ 

‘But  what  has  one  of  the  Big  People  got  to  do  with  us?’ 
said  Pippin.
I  was  told  to  find  you  before  Midsummer,  and  that  is 
now  here.
Don’t  let  him  turn  me  into  anything  unnatural!
‘We  are  forgetting  our  family  history!
But  here  we  are  not  above  sixty  leagues, 
I  guess,  south  of  the  Southfarthing  away  in  your  Shire,  hun¬ 
dreds  of  long  miles  yonder.
They  watched  the  pale  rings  of  light  round  his  lanterns  as 
they  dwindled  into  the  foggy  night.
‘You  look  the  same  as  ever, 
Frodo!’ 

‘So  do  you,’  Frodo  replied;  but  secretly  he  thought  that 
Gandalf  looked  older  and  more  careworn.
The  evening  was  closing  in,  and  his 
cloaked  figure  quickly  vanished  into  the  twilight.
No  living  hobbit 
(save  Bilbo)  could  remember  the  Fell  Winter  of  13 11,  when 
white  wolves  invaded  the  Shire  over  the  frozen  Brandywine.
And  Aragorn  gave  it  a  new  name 
and  called  it  Anduril,  Flame  of  the  West.
‘But  what 
about  these  Tree-men,  these  giants,  as  you  might  call  them?
We 
can  bide  our  time,  we  can  keep  our  thoughts  in  our  hearts, 
deploring  maybe  evils  done  by  the  way,  but  approving  the 
high  and  ultimate  purpose:  Knowledge,  Rule,  Order;  all  the 
things  that  we  have  so  far  striven  in  vain  to  accomplish, 
hindered  rather  than  helped  by  our  weak  or  idle  friends.
But  however  a  removal  might 
fit  in  with  the  designs  of  his  wizardry,  there  was  no  doubt 
about  the  fact:  Frodo  Baggins  was  going  back  to  Buckland.
Merry  got  down  and  unlocked  the 
gate,  and  when  they  had  all  passed  through  he  pushed  it  to 
again.
Strider  sat  silent  for  a 
while,  looking  at  the  hobbits,  as  if  he  was  weighing  up  their 
strength  and  courage.
This 
path  was  made  to  serve  the  forts  along  the  walls.
Already  the  writing  upon  it,  which  at  first  was  as 
clear  as  red  flame,  fadeth  and  is  now  only  barely  to  be 
read.
‘Old 
Man  Willow?
Frodo!
But  surely  they  will  understand.
But  my  lad  Sam 
will  know  more  about  that.
‘We  must  divide  up  into 
pairs,  and  arrange  -  here,  hold  on!
‘You  cannot  pass,’  he  said.
We  did  not  find  where  the  northward  landing 
lies.
I  need  your  Ring:  that  you 
know  now;  but  I  give  you  my  word  that  I  do  not  desire  to 
keep  it.
‘You  do  not 
know  the  real  peril  yet;  but  you  shall.
I  was  just  going  out 
to  set  my  dogs  on  any  strangers.
To  his  distress  and  amaze¬ 
ment  he  found  that  he  was  no  longer  looking  at  Bilbo;  a 
shadow  seemed  to  have  fallen  between  them,  and  through 
it  he  found  himself  eyeing  a  little  wrinkled  creature  with  a 
hungry  face  and  bony  groping  hands.
There  we  can  strike  a  path  I  know  that  runs  at 
their  feet;  it  will  bring  us  to  Weathertop  from  the  north  and 
less  openly.
It  was  flickering  and  glowing  on  the  walls  away  down  the 
passage  before  them.
It  was  like 
looking  down  on  to  a  sloping  cloud-roof  from  above.
I  know  one  or 
two  ways  out  of  Bree-land  other  than  the  main  road.
Right  across  the  floor,  close  to 
the  feet  of  two  huge  pillars  a  great  fissure  had  opened.
Suddenly  the  foremost  Rider  spurred  his  horse  forward.
I  have  not 
much  hope  that  Gollum  can  be  cured  before  he  dies,  but 
there  is  a  chance  of  it.
His 
senses  were  sharper  and  more  aware  of  things  that  could  not 
be  seen.
That  helped  a  little,  for  there  were  only 
five,  not  nine,  when  your  camp  was  attacked.
So  I  had  to  trust  to  Aragorn.
‘My  cuts,  short  or  long,  don’t  go  wrong.’  He  took  a 
look  up  and  down  the  Road.
Tom  sat  on  a  while  beside  them  in  silence,  while  each  of 
them  tried  to  muster  the  courage  to  ask  one  of  the  many 
questions  he  had  meant  to  ask  at  supper.
It  was  the 
El vcn -folk  of  Gildor  that  told  me  this;  and  later  they  told  me 
that  you  had  left  your  home;  but  there  was  no  news  of  your 
leaving  Buckland.
At 
last  Haldir  led  them  down  the  southward  slopes  of  the  hill, 
and  they  came  again  to  the  great  gate  hung  with  lamps,  and 
to  the  white  bridge;  and  so  they  passed  out  and  left  the  city 
of  the  Elves.
Of  Numenor  he  spoke,  its  glory  and  its  fall,  and  the  return 
of  the  Kings  of  Men  to  Middle-earth  out  of  the  deeps  of  the 
Sea,  borne  upon  the  wings  of  storm.
Even  to  the  hobbits  it  was  a  legend  of  vague 
fear.
‘Why  did  you  do  that,  Boromir?’  said  Frodo.
Still  round  the  corner  we  may  meet 
A  sudden  tree  or  standing  stone 
That  none  have  seen  but  we  alone.
He  felt  old,  terribly  old,  yet  less  timid,  and  he  was  mortally 
hungry.
Then 
he  saw  the  young  moon  rising;  under  its  thin  light  there 
loomed  before  him  a  black  wall  of  rock,  pierced  by  a  dark 
arch  like  a  great  gate.
A  worthy 


STRIDER 


223 


Frodo  read  the  letter  to  himself,  and  then  passed  it  to 
Pippin  and  Sam.
Frodo  threw  himself  down,  and  lay  on  the  ground 


266 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


shivering.
Before  him 
stood  a  wide  dark  arch  opening  into  three  passages:  all  led  in 
the  same  general  direction,  eastwards;  but  the  left-hand  pass¬ 
age  plunged  down,  while  the  right-hand  climbed  up,  and  the 
middle  way  seemed  to  run  on,  smooth  and  level  but  very 
narrow.
But  as  for  throwing  it  away,  that  was  obviously 
wrong.
He  could  smell  the  trees 
and  the  trodden  grass.
Then  he  saw  against  the  Sun,  sinking  blood-red 
into  a  wrack  of  clouds,  the  black  outline  of  a  tall  ship  with 
torn  sails  riding  up  out  of  the  West.
Those 
things  I  must  decide.
But  he  knows  now  that  it  has  not 
perished,  that  it  has  been  found.
Not  a  fair  question.
‘Live 
and  learn!
Tom  had  provided  them  with 
plenty  for  the  comfort  of  the  day.
it  was  brought  within  my  grasp.
Below  their  refuge  were  white  humps  and  domes  and 
shapeless  deeps  beneath  which  the  path  that  they  had  trodden 
was  altogether  lost;  but  the  heights  above  were  hidden  in 
great  clouds  still  heavy  with  the  threat  of  snow.
They  usually  stood  open  and  doorwards  sat  here.
That  is 
a  road  at  any  rate  that  the  Enemy  will  least  expect  us  to 
take.’ 

‘We  do  not  know  what  he  expects,’  said  Boromir.
Here  upon 
its  western  side  under  the  shadow  of  Tol  Brandir  a  green 
lawn  ran  down  to  the  water  from  the  feet  of  Amon  Hen.
Hark  at  it 
singing  about  sleep  now!
I 
came  to  the  house  at  Crickhollow,  and  it  was  broken  open 
and  empty;  but  on  the  threshold  there  lay  a  cloak  that  had 
been  Frodo’s.
‘Then  what  were  you  all 
doing?
It  was  then  that  they  dis¬ 
covered  that  Boromir,  who  at  first  had  been  sitting  silent  on 
the  outside  of  the  circle,  was  no  longer  there.
and  with  that 
name  his  voice  seemed  to  grow  strong:  it  had  a  full  and 
lively  sound,  and  the  dark  chamber  echoed  as  if  to  drum  and 
trumpet.
Let  them  go!
Each  time 
they  climbed  a  ridge  the  breeze  seemed  to  have  grown  less.
And  he 
gropes  ever  to  see  me  and  my  thought.
Yet  I  have  come  so  far,  and  I  say  this:  now  we  have  reached 
the  last  choice,  it  is  clear  to  me  that  I  cannot  leave  Frodo.
At  ninety-nine  they  began  to  call 
him  well-preserved,  but  unchanged  would  have  been  nearer  the 
mark.
We  could  per¬ 
haps  find  our  way  through  and  come  round  to  Rivendell 
from  the  north;  but  it  would  take  too  long,  for  I  do  not  know 
the  way,  and  our  food  would  not  last.
Among  them,  nodding  on  slender  stalks, 
were  other  flowers,  white  and  palest  green:  they  glimmered 
as  a  mist  amid  the  rich  hue  of  the  grass.
‘Well  told,  my  friend,’  he  said,  ‘but  that  is  enough  at  this 
time.
For  men  you  shall  have  Aragorn  son  of 
Arathorn,  for  the  Ring  of  Isildur  concerns  him  closely.’ 

‘Strider!’  cried  Frodo.
Here  it  is  in  full.
All  the  wall  gave  way,  and  the  roof  of 
the  chamber  as  well,  I  think.
Though  wind  may  blow  and  rain  may  fall, 

We  must  away  ere  break  of  day 
Far  over  wood  and  mountain  tall.
There  was  no  echo  or  answer  though  the 
wood  seemed  to  become  more  crowded  and  more  watchful 
than  before.
Suddenly  he  produced  a  large  basket  from  under  the  seat.
For  the  Elves  the  world  moves,  and  it  moves  both  very 
swift  and  very  slow.
‘As  soon  as 
Gandalf  reported  that  you  were  recovered,  the  preparations 
began.’  He  had  hardly  finished  speaking  when  they  were 
summoned  to  the  hall  by  the  ringing  of  many  bells.
They  began  to  feel  that  all  this  country 
was  unreal,  and  that  they  were  stumbling  through  an  ominous 
dream  that  led  to  no  awakening.
‘But  the 
time  has  come  for  him  to  open  out.
Fear  now  filled  all  Frodo’s  mind.
‘Well,  as  for  the  name,  Bilbo  very  foolishly  told  Gollum 
himself;  and  after  that  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  discover 
his  country,  once  Gollum  came  out.
‘Then  up  he  came  spluttering,  with  weeds  in  his  hair  and 
a  handful  of  mud;  and  he  swam  to  the  bank.
Yet  they  will  cast  all  away  rather  than 
submit  to  Sauron:  for  they  know  him  now.
‘But  there  is  only  one 
Power  in  this  world  that  knows  all  about  the  Rings  and  their 
effects;  and  as  far  as  I  know  there  is  no  Power  in  the  world 
that  knows  all  about  hobbits.
Those  that  followed  him  knew  not  his  mind 
and  cannot  report  his  full  purpose.
It  is 
quite  as  dangerous  as  Black  Riders.’ 

‘Not  quite,’  said  Merry.
They  lived  on  the  Hill 
itself,  in  Number  3  Bagshot  Row  just  below  Bag  End.
Whence  came  the  hobbit’s  ring?
Great  rippling  rings  formed 
on  the  surface  out  beyond  where  the  stone  had  fallen,  and 
they  moved  slowly  towards  the  foot  of  the  cliff.
Every  now  and  again  the  drum-beats  throbbed  and  rolled: 
doom ,  doom.
Frodo  looked  at  Aragorn,  but  he  seemed  deep 
in  his  own  thought  and  made  no  sign  that  he  had  heeded 
Boromir’s  words.
And  run  he  did,  out  of  the  back  door,  through 
the  garden,  and  over  the  fields.
You’ve  only  to 
name  it,  I  said.
Well,  fond  is  not  the  right  word.
From  the  feeling  of  the  air  we  must  be  in  a  wide 
hall.
The  wide  world  is  all  about  you: 
you  can  fence  yourselves  in,  but  you  cannot  for  ever  fence 
it  out.’ 

‘I  know  -  and  yet  it  has  always  seemed  so  safe  and  familiar.
The  leaves 
blew  upwards  in  sudden  gusts  of  wind,  and  spots  of  rain 
began  to  fall  from  the  overcast  sky.
They  saw  nothing  more,  until  they  stumbled  over  the  body 
of  Frodo,  lying  as  if  dead,  face  downwards  on  the  grass  with 
his  sword  beneath  him.
Remember  Galadriel  and 
her  Mirror!’ 

Frodo  took  the  phial,  and  for  a  moment  as  it  shone  between 
them,  he  saw  her  again  standing  like  a  queen,  great  and 
beautiful,  but  no  longer  terrible.
But  you  must  take  the  road 
south  as  soon  as  it  is  fully  light.’ 

Day  came  pale  from  the  East.
It  is  time  we  began  to  climb  up  again.’ 

For  eight  dark  hours,  not  counting  two  brief  halts,  they 
marched  on;  and  they  met  no  danger,  and  heard  nothing, 
and  saw  nothing  but  the  faint  gleam  of  the  wizard’s  light, 
bobbing  like  a  will-o’-the-wisp  in  front  of  them.
Frodo  gazed  at 
the  ring  with  awe;  for  suddenly  it  seemed  to  him  that  he 
understood.
A  smoke 


474 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


as  of  fire  and  battle  arose,  and  again  the  sun  went  down  in  a 
burning  red  that  faded  into  a  grey  mist;  and  into  the  mist  a 
small  ship  passed  away,  twinkling  with  lights.
Three  were  carried  away  by  the  first  assault  of  the  flood; 
the  others  were  now  hurled  into  the  water  by  their  horses  and 
overwhelmed.’ 

‘And  is  that  the  end  of  the  Black  Riders?’  asked  Frodo.
The  others  go  with  him  as  free  companions,  to  help  him  on 
his  way.
Sleep  gathered  on 
their  eyelids.
Before  long  Gimli  spoke.
There  were  several  labels  of  this 
sort: 

ForADELARD  TO  OK,  for  his  VERY  OWN,  from  Bilbo',  on 
an  umbrella.
And  now  there’s  you.
‘Then  what  was  the  use  of  bringing  us  to  this  accursed 
spot?’  cried  Boromir,  glancing  back  with  a  shudder  at  the 
dark  water.
A  bitter  wind  swirled  among 
the  rocks.
There  is  time  yet.
They  advanced  slowly,  for 
they  had  to  pick  their  way  through  a  pathless  country,  encum¬ 
bered  by  fallen  trees  and  tumbled  rocks.
There  are  many 
streams  and  wells  in  the  Mines,  but  they  should  not  be 
touched.
He  was  very  pleased  with  his  discovery  and  he  concealed  it; 
and  he  used  it  to  find  out  secrets,  and  he  put  his  knowledge 
to  crooked  and  malicious  uses.
‘But  you  had  better  tell  us  about 
it,  and  let  us  know  the  worst  at  once.’ 

‘The  road  that  I  speak  of  leads  to  the  Mines  of  Moria,’  said 
Gandalf.
That  is  troll-country,  and  little  known  to  me.
He  got  out  of  bed  and  discovered 
that  his  arm  was  already  nearly  as  useful  again  as  it  ever  had 
been.
I 
have  no  doubt  that  Smeagol’s  grandmother  was  a  matriarch, 
a  great  person  in  her  way,  but  to  talk  of  her  possessing  many 
Elven-rings  was  absurd,  and  as  for  giving  them  away,  it  was 
a  lie.
Into  Anduin  the  Great  it 
fell;  and  long  ago,  while  Sauron  slept,  it  was  rolled  down  the 
River  to  the  Sea.
It 
is  not  cold,’  he  added,  touching  his  left  hand  with  his  right.
Hissed  at  me,  he  did.
Strider  immediately  went  to  fetch  the  landlord.
Now  far  ahead  the  Road  has  gone, 

And  I  must  follow,  if  I  can, 

Pursuing  it  with  weary  feet, 

Until  it  joins  some  larger  way, 

Where  many  paths  and  errands  meet.
‘I  it  was  who  first  summoned  the  White  Council.
They  hurried  along  with  all  the  speed  they  could  make, 
and  after  a  mile  or  two  they  saw  the  Last  Bridge  ahead,  at 
the  bottom  of  a  short  steep  slope.
But  Isengard  is  a  circle  of  sheer  rocks 
that  enclose  a  valley  as  with  a  wall,  and  in  the  midst  of  that 
valley  is  a  tower  of  stone  called  Orthanc.
‘This  ring!’  he  stammered.
When  the  light  of  the  last  farm  was  far  behind, 
peeping  among  the  trees,  Frodo  turned  and  waved  a  hand  in 
farewell.
Even  if  Gollum  said  the 
same  once.
‘I  pity  snails,  and  all  that  carry  their  homes  on  their 
backs.’ 

‘I  could  take  a  lot  more  yet,  sir.
If  the  horsemen  had  already  found  the  dell, 
the  sooner  Strider  led  them  somewhere  else  the  better.
My  dear  Bagginses  and  Boffins ,  he  began  again;  and  my 
dear  Books  and  Brandybucks,  and  Grubbs,  and  Chubbs,  and 
Burrowses,  and  Hornblowers,  and  Bolgers,  Bracegirdles,  Good- 
bodies,  Brockhouses  and  Proudfoots.
Suddenly  the  great  bow  of  Lorien  sang.
But  before  long  the  snow  was  falling  fast, 
filling  all  the  air,  and  swirling  into  Frodo’s  eyes.
Of  old  he  was  an  Elven-king, 

A  lord  of  tree  and  glen, 

When  golden  were  the  boughs  in  spring 
In  fair  Lothlorien.
The  ores  stood  still,  and  a  dead 
silence  fell.
From  the  outside  nothing  will  move  them  save 
the  spell  of  command.
But  come!
The  trees  seemed  to  close  in 
before  them.
Those  who  made 
them  did  not  desire  strength  or  domination  or  hoarded 
wealth,  but  understanding,  making,  and  healing,  to  preserve 
all  things  unstained.
But  what  has  happened  to  the  water,  I  cannot  guess;  it  used 
to  be  swift  and  noisy.
If  I 
do  not  come,  Elrond  will  advise  you.
‘  “Yes,  I  have  come,”  I  said.
‘Yes,  to  Mordor,’  said  Gandalf.
And  in  the  middle  of  it  all  Mr.
Tom  could  be  heard  about 
the  house,  clattering  in  the  kitchen,  and  up  and  down  the 
stairs,  and  singing  here  and  there  outside.
Doom,  doom,  doom  the  drum-beats  rolled 
behind,  mournful  now  and  slow;  doom!
For  I  do  not  wish  to  become  like  the  Dark  Lord 
himself.
A  shadow 
now  lay  round  the  edge  of  sight,  a  dark  haze  above  which  the 
upper  sky  was  like  a  blue  cap,  hot  and  heavy.
He  simply  vanished,  as  if  he  had  gone  slap 
through  the  floor  without  leaving  a  hole!
‘Our  last  short  cut 
through  woods  nearly  ended  in  disaster.’ 

‘Ah,  but  you  had  not  got  me  with  you  then,’  laughed 
Strider.
We  feared  that  you 
were  in  danger  upon  the  road.’ 

‘Then  Gandalf  has  reached  Rivendell?’  cried  Frodo 
joyfully.
I  have  said  good-bye,  and  I 
couldn’t  bear  to  do  it  all  over  again.’  He  picked  up  his  bag 
and  moved  to  the  door.
‘I  do  not  foretell,  for 
all  foretelling  is  now  vain:  on  the  one  hand  lies  darkness,  and 
on  the  other  only  hope.
Not  so  the  One.
There  was  some  scattered 
clapping,  but  most  of  them  were  trying  to  work  it  out  and 
see  if  it  came  to  a  compliment.
He  knew  of  nothing  that  would  prevent  them  from  crossing 
as  easily  as  he  had  done;  and  he  felt  that  it  was  useless  to 
try  to  escape  over  the  long  uncertain  path  from  the  Ford  to 
the  edge  of  Rivendell,  if  once  the  Riders  crossed.
Only  I  hear  the  stones 
lament  them:  deep  they  delved  us,  fair  they  wrought  us,  high 
they  builded  us;  but  they  are  gone.
True-hearted  Men,  they  will  not  be 
corrupted.
Something  may  happen  in  the  night,  before 
we  leave  Bree.’ 

‘What  will  happen?’  said  Merry.
‘There  he  stands 
smiling  in  the  sun!’  He  shook  his  fist  at  the  furthest  of  the 
snow-capped  peaks  and  turned  away.
Their  quiet  ponies  were  almost  frisky,  sniffing  and 
moving  restlessly.
We  drove  them  off 
after  some  time;  they  were  many  and  fierce,  but  they  came 
from  over  the  mountains,  and  were  unused  to  the  woods.
.
Aragorn  hoped  to  find  some  way  by  which  they  could 
carry  both  their  boats  and  their  baggage  to  the  smoother 
water  beyond  the  Rapids.
Beside  them  Gimli 
stood  with  his  stout  legs  apart,  wielding  his  dwarf-axe.
We 
could  not  now  take  it  back  to  him,  unguessed,  unmarked  by 
any  spy.
It  was  quite  useless.
‘It  is  eight  and  thirty  years  of  the  world  outside  since  you 
came  to  this  land;  and  those  years  lie  heavy  on  you.
‘What  be  you 


i58 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


a-thinking  of?
‘But  how  would  this 
suit?
But  either  in  his  dreams  or 
out  of  them,  he  could  not  tell  which,  Frodo  heard  a  sweet 
singing  running  in  his  mind:  a  song  that  seemed  to  come  like 
a  pale  light  behind  a  grey  rain-curtain,  and  growing  stronger 
to  turn  the  veil  all  to  glass  and  silver,  until  at  last  it  was  rolled 
back,  and  a  far  green  country  opened  before  him  under  a 
swift  sunrise.
Such  are  these.
Beyond,  the  low  lands  lay  dim  and  flat 
under  the  stars.
At  the  moment  that  was  their  chief  danger;  for  in  the 
dark  they  could  not  see  a  descent,  until  they  came  on  it  and 
put  their  feet  out  into  emptiness.
As  if  a  dark  veil  had  been 
withdrawn,  the  Mirror  grew  grey,  and  then  clear.
It  was  the  same  Ring,  or 
looked  the  same  and  weighed  the  same:  for  that  Ring  had 
always  seemed  to  Frodo  to  weigh  strangely  heavy  in  the  hand.
‘I  shall  not  ride  him,  if  I  am 
to  be  carried  off  to  Rivendell  or  anywhere  else,  leaving  my 
friends  behind  in  danger.’ 

Glorfindel  smiled.
The  poorer  hobbits,  and 
especially  those  of  Bagshot  Row,  did  very  well.
‘There  is  even  a  chance  that  Dwarves  are  there,  and  that 
in  some  deep  hall  of  his  fathers,  Balin  son  of  Fundin  may  be 
found.
At  that  moment  Frodo  threw  himself  forward  on  the 
ground,  and  he  heard  himself  crying  aloud:  O  Elbereth!
But  there  does  not 
seem  any  choice.
I  will  not 
give  you  counsel,  saying  do  this,  or  do  that.
Then  Balin  has  set  up  his  seat  in  the  Chamber  of 
MazarbuV 

‘The  Chamber  of  Records,’  said  Gimli.
From  gnashing  of  the  Narrow  Ice 
where  shadow  lies  on  frozen  hills, 
from  nether  heats  and  burning  waste 
he  turned  in  haste,  and  roving  still 
on  starless  waters  far  astray 
at  last  he  came  to  Night  of  Naught, 
and  passed,  and  never  sight  he  saw 
of  shining  shore  nor  light  he  sought.
He  was  taking  a  wandering  course  with  many  turns  and 
doublings,  to  put  off  any  pursuit.
Then  they  wrapped  themselves  warmly,  not  only 
in  the  fur-cloaks  of  the  Elves,  but  in  their  own  blankets  as 
well,  and  tried  to  go  to  sleep.
Bilbo  Baggins  had  made  the 
words,  to  a  tune  that  was  as  old  as  the  hills,  and  taught  it  to 
Frodo  as  they  walked  in  the  lanes  of  the  Water- valley  and 
talked  about  Adventure.
‘But  I  thought,’  he  stammered  as  Elrond 
turned  towards  him,  ‘I  thought  that  the  fall  of  Gil-galad  was 
a  long  age  ago.’ 

‘So  it  was  indeed,’  answered  Elrond  gravely.
O  clearer  than  clear  water!
Gilthoniel!
Your  numbers 
were  chosen  to  fit  this  remarkable  total:  One  Gross,  if  I  may  use 
the  expression.
‘We  shall  all  be  scattered  and  lost,’  groaned  Aragorn.
‘He  is,  as  you  have  seen 
him,’  she  said  in  answer  to  his  look.
‘Good  night, 
Mr.
‘Well?’  said  Strider.
He 
sprang  forward  to  Boromir’s  side  and  drew  himself  up  to  his 
full  height.
And  maybe 


LOTHLORIEN 


439 


that  was  all  their  purpose,  and  they  had  nothing  else  to  do 
with  us  -  with  the  Ring.
It  has  an  unwholesome  look.’ 

‘We  must  find  a  way  round  the  northern  edge,’  said  Gimli.
If  he  screws  himself  up  to  go,  he’ll 
want  to  go  alone.
Fatty  Bolger  had  not  been  idle.
It  laid  hold  of  the  iron  ring,  and  then  it  perceived  me  and  my 
spell.
It  cannot 
be  less  than  forty  miles  from  West-door  to  East-gate  in  a 
direct  line,  and  the  road  may  wind  much.’ 

After  only  a  brief  rest  they  started  on  their  way  again.
‘I 
wish  you  were  not  going  into  the  Forest.
‘What  other  fairer  way  would  you  desire?’  said  Aragorn.
Go  to  sleep!
There  was  trouble  away  in  the  South,  and  it  seemed 


204  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

that  the  Men  who  had  come  up  the  Greenway  were  on  the 
move,  looking  for  lands  where  they  could  find  some  peace.
‘We  must  make  for  the  Road  again,’  he  said.
Bilbo  got  up  and  bowed.
No  horseman  had  passed  since  then,  as  far  as  he 
could  see.
How  long  have  you  been 
eavesdropping?’ 

‘Eavesdropping,  sir?
I  should  like  to  know 
where  it  is,  if  you  go  wandering  again.
‘Here  is  Nimrodel!’  said  Legolas.
Beyond  the  fire  he  saw 
swarming  black  figures:  there  seemed  to  be  hundreds  of  ores.
Then  the  vision  faded,  and 
they  were  back  in  the  sunlit  world.
But  though  his  fear  was  so  great  that  it  seemed  to  be  part 
of  the  very  darkness  that  was  round  him,  he  found  himself 
as  he  lay  thinking  about  Bilbo  Baggins  and  his  stories,  of  their 
jogging  along  together  in  the  lanes  of  the  Shire  and  talking 
about  roads  and  adventures.
Soft  as  butter  they  can  be, 
and  yet  sometimes  as  tough  as  old  tree-roots.
For  the  moment 
they  are  hanging  back,  but  there  is  something  else  there.
Mithril!
They  did 
not  stir,  but  the  sickly  hue  had  left  them.
‘I  do  not  doubt  that  news  of  the  discomfiture  of  the 
Riders  has  already  reached  him,  and  he  will  be  filled  with 
wrath.
Many  sorrows  befell  them  afterwards,  and  they  were 
parted  long.
At 
the  head  of  the  glen  a  torrent  flowed  like  a  white  lace  over 
an  endless  ladder  of  short  falls,  and  a  mist  of  foam  hung  in 
the  air  about  the  mountains’  feet.
Many  Elves  were  seated 
there.
You’ve  got  sharp  ears,  Sam:  can  you  hear 
anything  coming?’ 

They  stood  still,  almost  holding  their  breath  as  they 
listened;  but  there  was  no  sound  of  pursuit.
He  was  in  and  out  pretty  often  last  spring; 
but  I  haven’t  seen  him  about  lately.
He  breathed  with  relief  when  he  was  safely  across.
We  should  have  no  shelter 
there  from  snow,  or  stones  -  or  anything  else.’ 

‘And  it  is  no  good  going  back  while  the  storm  holds,’  said 
Aragorn.
He  waved  his  hand,  and 
then  turned  and  (following  Bilbo,  if  he  had  known  it)  hurried 
after  Peregrin  down  the  garden-path.
If  what  I’ve  seen  turns  out  true, 
somebody’s  going  to  catch  it  hot!’ 

‘Do  you  now  wish  to  look,  Frodo?’  said  the  Lady  Galadriel.
So  Radagast  said  to  me.” 

‘  “Radagast  the  Brown!”  laughed  Saruman,  and  he  no 
longer  concealed  his  scorn.
I  only  hope  you  will 
not  need  rescuing  before  the  day  is  out.
You  might  have  done  in  the  real  Strider  and  took  his 
clothes.
Well,  well!
The  trail  was  long  cold  when  I 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


77 


took  it  up  again,  after  Bilbo  left  here.
‘It  would 
have  saved  time.’ 

‘Would  it?
Even  those  who  had, 
or  pretended  to  have  Party  Business  were  seldom  allowed 
inside.
Expect  me  when  you  see  me!
F 

PPS.
Which  reminds  me, 
I  want  to  see  Elrond.
Their  fear  left  them,  though  they  still 
felt  uneasy.
Quite  apart  from  murder  by  night  on  his 
own  account,  he  may  put  any  enemy  that  is  about  on  our 
track.’ 

The  night  passed  without  Gollum  showing  so  much  as  a 
shadow  again.
What  then?
Then 
we  formed  our  conspiracy;  and  as  we  were  serious,  too,  and 
meant  business,  we  have  not  been  too  scrupulous.
“Not  yet?
‘I  do  not  know,’  Strider  answered.
The  strangers,  especially 
those  that  had  come  up  the  Greenway,  stared  at  them 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY  203 

curiously.
The  leaves  fluttering  against  the  bright 
sky  dazzled  him,  and  he  toppled  over,  lying  where  he  fell 
upon  the  grass.
‘He  is  wise  enough  on  his 
own  ground.
A  loud  scream  came  from  Merry,  and  from  far 
inside  the  tree  they  heard  Pippin  give  a  muffled  yell.
He  shivered.
Some  had  gone  north  beyond  the  springs  of  the 
Hoarwell  into  the  Ettenmoors;  and  others  had  gone  west,  and 
with  the  help  of  Aragorn  and  the  Rangers  had  searched  the 
lands  far  down  the  Greyflood,  as  far  as  Tharbad,  where  the 
old  North  Road  crossed  the  river  by  a  ruined  town.
Water  cold  we  may  pour  at  need 
down  a  thirsty  throat  and  be  glad  indeed; 
but  better  is  Beer,  if  drink  we  lack, 
and  Water  Hot  poured  down  the  back.
But  some  of  our  kinsfolk  dwell  still  in  peace 
in  Rivendell.
Something  has  just  come  back 
to  my  mind  that  I  ought  to  tell  you.
Legolas 
was  pressed  against  the  rock,  as  if  listening.
Yet  it 
is  a  ring.
No  one  was  in  sight;  and  he  led 
the  way  quickly  down  towards  the  wooded  valley.
In  those  last  days  the  hobbits  sat  together  in  the  evening  in 
the  Hall  of  Fire,  and  there  among  many  tales  they  heard  told 
in  full  the  lay  of  Beren  and  Luthien  and  the  winning  of  the 
Great  Jewel;  but  in  the  day,  while  Merry  and  Pippin  were 
out  and  about,  Frodo  and  Sam  were  to  be  found  with  Bilbo 
in  his  own  small  room.
‘They  say  in  my  land  that  he  can  govern  the  storms 
in  the  Mountains  of  Shadow  that  stand  upon  the  borders  of 
Mordor.
Anyway,  this  is  what  happened.’ 

To  some  there  Bilbo’s  tale  was  wholly  new,  and  they 
listened  with  amazement  while  the  old  hobbit,  actually  not  at 
all  displeased,  recounted  his  adventure  with  Gollum,  at  full 
length.
Will  you  have 
him?’ 

There  was  a  heavy  silence.
For  such  is  the  way  of  it:  to 
find  and  lose,  as  it  seems  to  those  whose  boat  is  on  the 
running  stream.
Suddenly  a  great  fish  took  his  hook,  and  before  he 


70 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


knew  where  he  was,  he  was  dragged  out  and  down  into  the 
water,  to  the  bottom.
‘What  is  it?’  said  Frodo.
But  one  thing  drives 
out  another,  as  you’ll  admit;  and  I’m  a  busy  man.
It  would  also  show  that  he  was  in 
a  hurry  and  danger  was  at  hand,  so  that  he  had  no  time  or 
did  not  dare  to  write  anything  longer  or  plainer.
What  do  you 
really  know  about  -  about  my  business;  and  how  do  you 
know  it?’ 

‘The  lesson  in  caution  has  been  well  learned,’  said  Strider 
with  a  grim  smile.
Then,  turning  to 
Frodo,  he  beckoned  to  him.
Against  the 
opposite  wall  was  a  long  bench  laden  with  wide  earthenware 


164  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

basins,  and  beside  it  stood  brown  ewers  filled  with  water, 
some  cold,  some  steaming  hot.
Yet 
death  maybe  was  better  than  what  else  might  have  befallen 
him.
Then  there  is  a  blur  followed  by 
Floi  under  grass  near  Mirror  mere.
He  was  lying  in  a 
bower  made  by  a  living  tree  with  branches  laced  and  drooping 
to  the  ground;  his  bed  was  of  fern  and  grass,  deep  and  soft 
and  strangely  fragrant.
Take  care  of  yourself!
Can’t  a  hobbit  walk  from  the  Water  to 
the  River  in  peace?’ 

‘But  it  is  not  your  own  Shire,’  said  Gildor.
When  their  breakfast  was  over,  and  their  packs  all  trussed 
up  again,  it  was  after  ten  o’clock,  and  the  day  was  beginning 
to  turn  fine  and  hot.
Then  suddenly  he  put  it  to  his  eye  and 
laughed.
Their  going  was  very  slow.
They  looked  anxiously  back  towards  the  setting  sun, 
but  the  Road  was  brown  and  empty.
You  shall  not  be  the  only  guest 
without  a  gift.’ 

‘There  is  nothing,  Lady  Galadriel,’  said  Gimli,  bowing  low 
and  stammering.
‘Come  in!
I  will  see  now  what  is  their  shape  and  way  of  growth.’ 

‘Whatever  it  may  be,’  said  Pippin,  ‘they  will  be  marvellous 
trees  indeed  if  they  can  offer  any  rest  at  night,  except  to  birds.
Go  and  ask 
Ferny  where  your  handsome  friend  is!’  But  it  appeared  that 
he  was  nobody’s  friend,  and  nobody  could  recollect  when  he 
had  joined  their  party.
He  was  the  Lord  of  Rivendell  and  mighty  among 
both  Elves  and  Men.
But  I  see  that  you  are  an  Elf-friend; 
the  light  in  your  eyes  and  the  ring  in  your  voice  tells  it.
When  all  the  guests  were  seated  before  his  chair  the  Lord 
looked  at  them  again.
If  they  had  succeeded,  you  would 
have  become  like  they  are,  only  weaker  and  under  their  com¬ 
mand.
For  the  moment  we  have  been  saved  from  disaster,  by 
Aragorn.’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Frodo,  ‘it  was  Strider  that  saved  us.
‘But  now  we  must  debate  no  longer.
‘Why,  you’ll  be  beating  Mr.
He  made  paths  before  the  Big  People,  and  saw  the 
little  People  arriving.
‘It’s  addressed  plain  enough,’  said  Mr.
The  standing 
stone  was  cold,  and  it  cast  a  long  pale  shadow  that  stretched 
eastward  over  them.
The  morning  came,  pale  and  clammy.
I  tried  to 
make  a  few  notes,  but  we  shall  have  to  go  over  it  all  again 
together  some  time,  if  I  am  to  write  it  up.
The  feast 
was  merry  and  the  food  all  that  his  hunger  could  desire.
You 
are  not  going  to  escape  so  easily!’ 

‘But  I  must  go,’  said  Frodo.
Welcome!’  the  Elf  then  said  again  in  the  Common  Lan¬ 
guage,  speaking  slowly.
‘I  had  a  funny 
dream  an  hour  or  two  before  we  stopped,  Mr.
But  you  must 
not  delay  too  long.’ 

‘What  about  the  autumn,  on  or  after  Our  Birthday?’  asked 
Frodo.
The  others  waited  huddled  together,  watching  until 
Boromir  and  Aragorn  dwindled  into  black  specks  in  the 
whiteness.
For  it  is  a  long  tale,  full  of  deeds  great  and  terrible, 
and  briefly  though  Elrond  spoke,  the  sun  rode  up  the  sky, 
and  the  morning  was  passing  ere  he  ceased.
The  North  would  have  known  them  little  but  for 
us.
High  up  above  the 
eastern  archway  through  a  shaft  near  the  roof  came  a  long 
pale  gleam;  and  across  the  hall  through  the  northern  arch 
light  also  glimmered  faint  and  distantly.
Suddenly  I  shivered  and  felt  that 
something  horrible  was  creeping  near:  there  was  a  sort  of 
deeper  shade  among  the  shadows  across  the  road,  just  beyond 
the  edge  of  the  lamplight.
Passing  through,  they  kept  on  along 
the  Road  for  some  miles.
If  I  remember  right,  there  was  a  flight  of  steps  cut  in 
the  rock  at  their  side,  but  the  main  road  wound  away  left  and 
climbed  with  several  loops  up  to  the  level  ground  at  the  top.
All  I  caught  was  ghask.
But  I  should  very  much  like  to  see 
Gandalf.
I  know  these  Riders.’  He  paused,  and  his  eyes 
were  cold  and  hard.
Much  too 
vigorously;  for  he  came  down,  bang,  into  a  tray  full  of  mugs, 
and  slipped,  and  rolled  off  the  table  with  a  crash,  clatter, 
and  bump!
I  do  not  know  if  I  can  do  anything  to  help 
you;  but  I  will  whisper  this  in  your  ears.
Along  the  crest  of  the  ridge  the  hobbits  could 
see  what  looked  to  be  the  remains  of  green-grown  walls  and 
dikes,  and  in  the  clefts  there  still  stood  the  ruins  of  old  works 
of  stone.
Just  then  I  saw  the 
eyes:  two  pale  sort  of  points,  shiny-like,  on  a  hump  at  the 
near  end  of  the  log.
I  am  older  than  I  look.
How¬ 
ever  that  may  be:  they  woke  suddenly  and  uncomfortably 
from  a  sleep  they  had  never  meant  to  take.
‘Where  was  I?’  said  the  landlord,  pausing  and  snapping  his 
fingers.
But  where  that  may  be, 
though  the  Lord  and  Lady  may  know,  I  do  not.’ 

‘You  ought  at  least  to  guess,  since  you  have  seen  us,’  said 
Merry.
Chapter  3 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


‘You  ought  to  go  quietly,  and  you  ought  to  go  soon,’  said 
Gandalf.
Clop-clop,  clop-clop.
Upon  the  south 
side  of  the  lawn  there  stood  the  mightiest  of  all  the  trees;  its 
great  smooth  bole  gleamed  like  grey  silk,  and  up  it  towered, 
until  its  first  branches,  far  above,  opened  their  huge  limbs 
under  shadowy  clouds  of  leaves.
But 
none  were  more  dangerous  than  the  Great  Willow:  his  heart 
was  rotten,  but  his  strength  was  green;  and  he  was  cunning, 
and  a  master  of  winds,  and  his  song  and  thought  ran  through 
the  woods  on  both  sides  of  the  river.
And  have  you  any  idea  how  far  eastward  we 
should  have  to  go?’ 

‘No,’  said  Merry,  ‘I  haven’t.
There’s  queer  folk  about.
‘Gandalf,  Elrond  -  all  these  folk  have  taught 
you  to  say  so.
Farewell!’  He  bowed, 
and  turned  away,  and  hastened  back  up  the  greensward  to 
the  road  again.
Slowly  the 
hall  filled,  and  Frodo  looked  with  delight  upon  the  many  fair 
faces  that  were  gathered  together;  the  golden  firelight  played 
upon  them  and  shimmered  in  their  hair.
‘Well,  Mr.
There 
was  another  burst  of  song,  and  then  suddenly,  hopping  and 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


157 


dancing  along  the  path,  there  appeared  above  the  reeds  an 
old  battered  hat  with  a  tall  crown  and  a  long  blue  feather 
stuck  in  the  band.
Gandalf  took  no  turns,  right  or  left,  for  the  passage  seemed 
to  be  going  in  the  direction  that  he  desired.
What  do  you  make 
of  it  all,  Frodo?’ 

‘Cousin  Frodo  has  been  very  close,’  said  Pippin.
Stick  to  your 
plan  -  your  whole  plan,  mind  -  and  I  hope  it  will  turn  out 
for  the  best,  for  you,  and  for  all  of  us.’ 

‘I  hope  so.
For  Bree  stood  at  an  old  meeting  of  ways;  another  ancient 
road  crossed  the  East  Road  just  outside  the  dike  at  the  western 
end  of  the  village,  and  in  former  days  Men  and  other  folic 
of  various  sorts  had  travelled  much  on  it.
They  had  divided  their 
forces,  I  learned:  some  remained  on  the  eastern  borders,  not 
far  from  the  Greenway,  and  some  invaded  the  Shire  from  the 
south.
And  I  am  no  spy.
hop  along!
And  if  I  had  known 
what  the  world  outside  was  like,  I  don’t  think  I  should  have 
had  the  heart  to  leave  it.’ 

‘Not  even  to  see  fair  Lothlorien?’  said  Haldir.
I 
will  go  alone.
Once  or  twice  the  travellers 
heard  the  rush  and  whine  of  swan-wings,  and  looking  up  they 
saw  a  great  phalanx  streaming  along  the  sky.
O  Lady  clear!
I  suppose  we  had 
better  do  so.’ 

What  do  you  mean?’  asked  Frodo.
His  eyes 


254 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


shone,  and  his  voice  was  rich  and  deep.
“Strider”  I  am 
to  one  fat  man  who  lives  within  a  day’s  march  of  foes  that 
would  freeze  his  heart,  or  lay  his  little  town  in  ruin,  if  he  were 
not  guarded  ceaselessly.
Long  ago  Gorhendad  Oldbuck,  head  of  the  Oldbuck 
family,  one  of  the  oldest  in  the  Marish  or  indeed  in  the  Shire, 
had  crossed  the  river,  which  was  the  original  boundary  of 
the  land  eastwards.
With  you  and  your  faithful  servant,  Gandalf  will  go;  for  this 
shall  be  his  great  task,  and  maybe  the  end  of  his  labours.
foes!
‘I  must  go  and  bar 
the  doors  quick,  but  I’ll  see  your  friend  is  let  in  when  he 
comes.
All  the  others  fled.
‘Put  it  out!
‘But  how  can  I  return 
without  shame  -  unless  there  is  indeed  no  other  way,  and  we 
are  already  defeated?’ 

‘You  are  right,  Frodo,’  said  Gandalf:  ‘to  go  back  is  to  admit 
defeat,  and  face  worse  defeat  to  come.
It  should  be  mine.
Then  Aragorn  recounted  all  that  had  happened  upon  the 
pass  of  Caradhras,  and  in  the  days  that  followed;  and  he 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL  463 

spoke  of  Balin  and  his  book,  and  the  fight  in  the  Chamber 
of  Mazarbul,  and  the  fire,  and  the  narrow  bridge,  and  the 
coming  of  the  Terror.
Frodo  is  as  nice  a 
young  hobbit  as  you  could  wish  to  meet.
The  air 
was  cool  and  soft,  as  if  it  were  early  spring,  yet  they  felt  about 
them  the  deep  and  thoughtful  quiet  of  winter.
I  will  now  risk  a  little  real  light.’ 

He  raised  his  staff,  and  for  a  brief  instant  there  was  a  blaze 
like  a  flash  of  lightning.
It  was  round  and 
unadorned,  as  it  were  one  of  the  lesser  rings;  but  its  maker  set 
marks  upon  it  that  the  skilled,  maybe,  could  still  see  and  read.” 

‘What  those  marks  were  he  had  not  said.
Night  under  Night  is  flown,  and  the  Gate  is  open!
There  was  then  a  silence,  broken  only  by  the  sound 
of  the  wind  in  the  leaves.
Put  me  down!’ 

Aragorn  nearly  dropped  him  in  his  amazement.
At  a  second  blow  the  door  yielded  and  fell  back,  with 
timbers  burst  and  lock  broken.
Even  Frodo  felt  better  in  the  morning  light,  but  every 
now  and  again  a  mist  seemed  to  obscure  his  sight,  and  he 
passed  his  hands  over  his  eyes.
Terror  overcame  Pippin  and  Merry,  and  they  threw  them¬ 
selves  flat  on  the  ground.
Aragorn  smote  to  the  ground 
the  captain  that  stood  in  his  path,  and  the  rest  fled  in  terror 
of  his  wrath.
It  must  have 
been  about  eleven  o’clock;  but  the  autumn  haze  still  pre¬ 
vented  them  from  seeing  much  in  other  directions.
He  walked  briskly  back  to  his  hole,  and  stood  for  a  moment 
listening  with  a  smile  to  the  din  in  the  pavilion,  and  to  the 
sounds  of  merrymaking  in  other  parts  of  the  field.
I  should 
say:  OUR  birthday.
‘Good  afternoon,  Mr.
At  the  end  of  the  fifth  day  the  ground  began  once  more  to 
rise  slowly  out  of  the  wide  shallow  valley  into  which  they  had 
descended.
Hugo  was  a  great  borrower 
of  books,  and  worse  than  usual  at  returning  them.
Leave  Bree!
Passing  through  an 
opening  they  came  suddenly  out  of  the  trees.
We  have  not  seen  such  a  thing  since  Bilbo 
went  away.
‘Well,’  cried  Legolas  as  he  ran  up,  ‘I  have  not  brought  the 
Sun.
‘They’ve  more  sense 
(in  some  ways)  than  you  wandering  hobbits  have  -  more 
sense  in  their  noses.
‘I  wish  to  help  you.
By  water,  wood  and  hill,  by  the  reed  and  willow, 

By  fire,  sun  and  moon,  harken  now  and  hear  us!
You  can  lay  the  blame  on  me, 
if  you  will.
Merry 
back.’  Then  suddenly  Sam  gave  a  cry  and  sprang  away.
In  the  black  wind  the  stars  shall  die, 
and  still  on  gold  here  let  them  lie, 
till  the  dark  lord  lifts  his  hand 
over  dead  sea  and  withered  land.
‘I  am  out  of  my  reckoning,’  he  said  to  Frodo.
But  so 
ends  all  hope  of  starting  early,  and  slipping  away  quietly!
‘But  my  home,  such  as  I  have,  is  in  the  North.
‘Well, 
good  night  to  you  all,’  he  said.
came  floating  back  down  the  wind, 
which  had  shifted  round  towards  the  south.
Paths  were 
few  and  winding,  and  led  them  often  only  to  the  edge  of 
some  sheer  fall,  or  down  into  treacherous  swamps.
For  a  moment  I  was 
afraid  that  we  had  let  loose  too  fierce  a  wrath,  and  the  flood 
would  get  out  of  hand  and  wash  you  all  away.
Indeed,  there  are 
many  birds  and  beasts  in  this  country  that  could  see  us,  as 
we  stand  here,  from  that  hill-top.
Legolas  shall  be  for 
the  Elves;  and  Gimli  son  of  Gloin  for  the  Dwarves.
‘He  wandered  in  loneliness,  weeping  a  little  for  the  hard¬ 
ness  of  the  world,  and  he  journeyed  up  the  River,  till  he  came 
to  a  stream  that  flowed  down  from  the  mountains,  and  he 
went  that  way.
‘It  is  not  the  way  of  the  Men  of  Minas 
Tirith  to  desert  their  friends  at  need,’  he  said,  ‘and  you  will 
need  my  strength,  if  ever  you  are  to  reach  the  Tindrock.
There  is  a  last  test  to 
make.
One  or  two 
other  hobbits  belonging  to  the  farm-household  came  in.
He  reckoned, 
very  probably,  that  his  house  would  be  full  again  on  many 
future  nights,  until  the  present  mystery  had  been  thoroughly 
discussed.
He  turned  round  and 
listened,  and  soon  there  could  be  no  doubt:  someone  was 
singing  a  song;  a  deep  glad  voice  was  singing  carelessly  and 
happily,  but  it  was  singing  nonsense: 

Hey  dol!
‘He 
can’t  go  on  riding  after  nightfall.
’ 

Well,  well,  he  is  gone,’  said  Gandalf.
Elrond  has  cured  you:  he  has  tended  you  for 
days,  ever  since  you  were  brought  in.’ 

‘Days?’  said  Frodo.
Suddenly  he  found  he  was 
out  in  the  open.
Yet  often  I  doubt  if  they  are  wise  and  not  merely  timid.
I  wonder  what  happened  afterwards;  but  there  is  no 
time  to  puzzle  out  the  last  few  pages.
He  hasn’t  taken  the  vittles  with  him.’ 
He  called  loudly  to  Frodo  to  send  the  wine  round  again.
‘Ores!’  he  said.
After  Weathertop 
our  journey  will  become  more  difficult,  and  we  shall  have  to 
choose  between  various  dangers.’ 

‘When  did  you  last  see  Gandalf?’  asked  Frodo.
At  the  same 
time  Boromir  and  Aragorn  reappeared  round  the  bend  far 
behind  him  and  came  labouring  up  the  slope.
I  do  not  know  what 
they  are  about:  possibly  there  is  some  trouble  away  south 
from  which  they  are  fleeing;  but  I  think  they  are  spying  out 
the  land.
The  others  sorted 
out  the  goods,  making  a  pile  of  all  that  could  be  left  behind, 
and  dividing  up  the  rest.
It  came  some  time  ago;  after  I  left  the 
Shire,  I  think.’ 

‘Then  it  was  late  in  coming,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘as  you  will  see.
Il6  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

Frodo  reckoned  they  had  eighteen  miles  to  go  in  a  straight  line.
But  why  worry?
Enormous  it  looked,  its  sprawling  branches  going  up  like 
reaching  arms  with  many  long-fingered  hands,  its  knotted 
and  twisted  trunk  gaping  in  wide  fissures  that  creaked  faintly 
as  the  boughs  moved.
‘But  it  is  a  heavy  burden.
I  have  sat  by  your  side  with  Sam  each  day.
‘I  never  told  him,  but  its  worth  was 
greater  than  the  value  of  the  whole  Shire  and  everything  in  it.
He  laughed  at  me,  for  my  words  were  empty,  and  he 
knew  it.
His  hand  left  the  bridle  and  gripped  the  hilt  of  his  sword,  and 
with  a  red  flash  he  drew  it.
‘What  is  it?’  he  whispered.
O  Lorien!
For  a  moment 
the  hobbits  noticed  nothing  strange  about  this.
Cheers  from  all  the  assembly.
But  do  not  stray 
far  or  out  of  call.’ 

Frodo  sat  for  a  moment  with  his  head  bowed.
‘How  should  I  know?
If  we  could  command  that,  then  the  Power  would  pass  to  us.
Up  he  went  and  sat  upon  the  ancient  chair,  feeling  like 


522  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

a  lost  child  that  had  clambered  upon  the  throne  of  mountain- 
kings.
But  as  they  looked  it  seemed  to  move  and  sway  this 
way  and  that,  as  if  searching  the  ground.
His  sword  broke  and  fell  out  of 
his  shaking  hand.
He  gave  orders  for 
more  wine  to  be  served;  then  he  got  up  and  drained  his  own 
glass  silently  to  the  health  of  Bilbo,  and  slipped  out  of  the 
pavilion.
The  noise  of  churning  water  came  up  from 
far  below,  as  if  some  great  mill-wheel  was  turning  in  the 
depths.
We  must  do  something  to  save  ourselves.’ 

‘Give  them  this,’  said  Gandalf,  searching  in  his  pack  and 
drawing  out  a  leathern  flask.
We  are  very  sorry  for  you.’ 

Frodo  opened  his  mouth  and  shut  it  again.
His  true  name  is  Aragorn.
Go  back  to  the  Shadow!
‘Back  to  the  hall,’  answered  Gandalf.
‘That,’  said  Merry,  pointing  with  his  hand,  ‘that  is  the  line 
of  the  Withywindle.
When  they  halted 
for  a  moment  they  heard  nothing  at  all,  unless  it  were 
occasionally  a  faint  trickle  and  drip  of  unseen  water.
They  breakfasted  now  off  the  remainder  of  Tom’s 


190  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

provisions,  meant  for  their  supper,  with  additions  that  Tom 
had  brought  with  him.
‘Leastways  old  Bilbo 
was  cracked,  and  Frodo’s  cracking.
By  that  pool  long  ago  I  found  the  River-daughter, 
fair  young  Goldberry  sitting  in  the  rushes.
‘Of  all  the  confounded  nuisances  you  are  the  worst,  Sam!’ 
he  said.
He’s 
got  nothing  except  what  he  ordered  us  to  pack.
Don’t  you  want  to?’ 

Well  yes  -  and  no.
The 
short  cut  has  gone  crooked  already;  but  we  got  under  cover 
only  just  in  time.
Far  off  was  the  dim  sky.
Merry  went  to  the  door:  ‘What  about  supper  and  beer  in 
the  throat?’  he  called.
‘You  will  get  plenty  when 
the  time  comes.’  Then  he  disappeared  inside  with  Bilbo,  and 
the  door  was  shut.
There’s  nothing  to  tell,  or  not 
much.
Tom  soon  disappeared  in  front  of  them,  and  the  noise  of  his 
singing  got  fainter  and  further  away.
Bag  -  Underhill,  sir,’  he  added  with  a  grin.
Not,  of  course, 
that  the  birthday-presents  were  always  new;  there  were  one 
or  two  old  mathoms  of  forgotten  uses  that  had  circulated  all 
around  the  district;  but  Bilbo  had  usually  given  new  presents, 
and  kept  those  that  he  received.
If 
he  was  still  following,  he  was  very  wary  and  cunning.
Come  back!’  they  called.
Soon  now  his  spies  on  foot  and  wing  will  be  abroad 
in  the  northern  lands.
Many  Happy  Returns!’  they  shouted,  and  they  ham¬ 
mered  joyously  on  the  tables.
Snow-white!
Not  to  evil,  I  think.
‘But  I  felt  so  queer.
Only  Gloin  smiled,  but  his  smile 
came  from  old  memories.
And  since  it  seemed  fit 
that  Isildur’s  heir  should  labour  to  repair  Isildur’s  fault,  I 
went  with  Gandalf  on  the  long  and  hopeless  search.’ 

Then  Gandalf  told  how  they  had  explored  the  whole  length 
of  Wilderland,  down  even  to  the  Mountains  of  Shadow  and 
the  fences  of  Mordor.
‘Then  cut  along  the  Row  and  meet  us  as  quick  as  you  can  at 


92 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


the  gate  in  the  lane  beyond  the  meadows.
Doom,  boom,  doom  went  the  drums  in  the  deep.
Bare  woods  stalked 
along  either  bank,  and  they  could  not  see  any  glimpse  of  the 
lands  behind.
AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY 


201 


‘Well  now,  what  was  I  going  to  say?’  said  Mr.
With  a  cry  and  a  splash  he  fell  face  downward 
into  deep  swift  water.
I  will  not  take  the  Ring  to  wield  it.’ 

‘Nor  I,’  said  Gandalf.
‘That’s  good  for  a 
beginning.
Soon  Strider  beckoned  to  them,  and  the  hobbits  left  the 


274  THE  fellowship  of  the  ring 

bushes  and  hurried  down  to  the  Road.
A  few  held  the  theory  -  sup¬ 
ported  by  the  nods  and  hints  of  Air.
Sam  shuffled  along,  clutching  hard,  and  looking  down  into 
the  pale  eddying  water  as  if  it  was  a  chasm  in  the  mountains.
‘  “Many  leagues,”  said  he,  “but  not  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.
‘Not  when  he 
had  escaped  the  unwelcome  visitor,  like  Bilbo  used  to.’ 

‘But  where  did  he  go?
There  were  not  only  many  roads  to  choose  from,  there 
were  also  in  many  places  holes  and  pitfalls,  and  dark  wells 
beside  the  path  in  which  their  passing  feet  echoed.
Then  a  wild  thought  of  escape  came 
to  him.
‘I  had  not  heard  that  folk  of  the  Shire 
were  so  sweet-tongued.
Snow-white!
If  they  think  we  have  made  for  Archet,  so  much  the  better.’ 

Whether  because  of  Strider’s  skill  or  for  some  other  reason, 
they  saw  no  sign  and  heard  no  sound  of  any  other  living  thing 
all  that  day:  neither  two-footed,  except  birds;  nor  four-footed, 
except  one  fox  and  a  few  squirrels.
Thin-clad  birches,  swaying  in  a  light  wind 
above  their  heads,  made  a  black  net  against  the  pale  sky.
A  remarkable  place  altogether.
The  hobbits  began  to  feel  very  hot.
Bilbo  smiled  and  laughed  happily.
And  yestereve  a  new  moon  came  again.
We  must  call  for  him.’ 

At  that  moment  Boromir  reappeared.
Follow 
my  staff!’ 

As  the  wizard  passed  on  ahead  up  the  great  steps,  he  held 
his  staff  aloft,  and  from  its  tip  there  came  a  faint  radiance.
‘Ah!
We  lost  our  way  in  the  woods,  back  near  Woodhall,  trying  to 
take  a  short  cut  to  the  Ferry.’ 

‘If  you  were  in  a  hurry,  the  road  would  have  served  you 
better,’  said  the  farmer.
‘That  what  should  be  shall  be,’  she  answered.
They 
hurried  forward,  for  they  had  still  a  mile  or  two  to  go  before 
they  could  reach  the  point  on  the  far  shore  that  Gandalf  was 
making  for;  and  then  he  had  still  to  find  the  doors.
But  he  did  not  tell  all  his 
thoughts  to  Gandalf.
‘And  I  expect 
that  you  are  all  as  weary  as  I  am,  or  wearier.
They  had  eaten  nothing 
since  the  early  morning.
“But  if  I  am  not  deceived,” 
said  I,  “things  are  now  moving  which  will  require  the  union 
of  all  our  strength.” 

‘  “That  may  be  so,”  he  said,  “but  the  thought  is  late  in 
coming  to  you.
They  will  not  sink,  lade  them  as  you  will;  but  they  are 
wayward  if  mishandled.
Where’s  your  Mr.
Not 
yet.’  He  turned  and  climbed  swiftly  down,  and  they  followed 
him.
Then  the  silence 
grew  until  even  Sam  felt  it.
The  Ring  that  hung  upon  its  chain  about  his  neck  grew 
heavy,  heavier  than  a  great  stone,  and  his  head  was  dragged 
downwards.
Even  if  you 
took  it  and  struck  it  with  a  heavy  sledge-hammer,  it  would 
make  no  dint  in  it.
Such  things  have  no 
hold  on  his  mind.
He  is  surer  of  finding  the  way  home  in  a  blind  night 
than  the  cats  of  Queen  Beruthiel.’ 

It  was  well  for  the  Company  that  they  had  such  a  guide.
They  reached  the  strip  of 
dry  land  between  the  lake  and  the  cliffs:  it  was  narrow,  often 
hardly  a  dozen  yards  across,  and  encumbered  with  fallen  rock 
and  stones;  but  they  found  a  way,  hugging  the  cliff,  and 
keeping  as  far  from  the  dark  water  as  they  might.
Whenever  one  comes  inside  one  finds  open  tracks;  but 
they  seem  to  shift  and  change  from  time  to  time  in  a  queer 
fashion.
It  is  what  he  may  tell 
others  that  I  am  afraid  of.
He  stumbled  forward  with  all  the  speed  he  could 
towards  the  cries;  but  the  light  was  now  gone,  and  clinging 


i82 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


night  had  closed  about  him,  so  that  it  was  impossible  to  be 
sure  of  any  direction.
Chapter  7 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL 


The  four  hobbits  stepped  over  the  wide  stone  threshold,  and 
stood  still,  blinking.
Buckland  is 
still  miles  away.’ 

The  shadows  of  the  trees  were  long  and  thin  on  the  grass, 
as  they  started  off  again.
It’s  from  Hobbiton  that  this  here  black 
rider  comes,  unless  there’s  more  than  one.
Then  I  spoke  to  him  and  he  bore 
me  away,  before  Saruman  was  aware.
Wouldn’t 
the  beast  bolt  back  to  him  with  all  our  stuff,  or  help  in  tracking 
us,  or  something?’ 

‘I  wonder,’  said  Strider.
Frodo  took  off  the  Ring  and  stepped  ashore  again.
Outside  it  is  getting  dark.’ 

‘Gandalf  has  been  saying  many  cheerful  things  like  that,’ 
said  Pippin.
He  told  me  that  they  were 
sailing  and  he  knows  a  bit  about  Elves.
Leave  your  barrow  empty!
The  head  was  so  bowed  that  he  could  see  no  face, 
and  presently  the  figure  turned  aside  round  a  bend  in  the 
road  and  went  out  of  the  Mirror’s  view.
‘That  is 
the  fairest  of  all  the  dwellings  of  my  people.
The  ponies  had  vanished!
‘And  who  are  you,  and  what  have  you  to  do  with  Minas 
Tirith?’  asked  Boromir,  looking  in  wonder  at  the  lean  face  of 
the  Ranger  and  his  weather-stained  cloak.
‘Poor  Bill  has  been  a  useful 
companion,  and  it  goes  to  my  heart  to  turn  him  adrift  now.
The 
moment  the  flood  appeared,  he  rushed  out,  followed  by 
Aragorn  and  the  others  with  flaming  brands.
It  is  a 
marvel  that  I  escaped!’ 

‘Yes,  fortune  or  fate  have  helped  you,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘not 
to  mention  courage.
It  was  a  merry  journey  with 
Tom  Bombadil  trotting  gaily  beside  them,  or  before  them, 
on  Fatty  Lumpkin,  who  could  move  much  faster  than  his 
girth  promised.
‘These  black  men,’  said  the  landlord  lowering  his  voice.
Water  Hot  is  a  noble  thing!
I’ll  see  to  the  orders,’  said  the  landlord.
But  I  had  forgotten 
Bombadil,  if  indeed  this  is  still  the  same  that  walked  the 
woods  and  hills  long  ago,  and  even  then  was  older  than  the 
old.
They  also  keep  a  horned  cow 
as  proud  as  any  queen; 

But  music  turns  her  head  like  ale, 

And  makes  her  wave  her  tufted  tail 
and  dance  upon  the  green.
‘Yet  may  I  not 
even  speak  of  it?
‘We  know  not  for  certain,’  answered  Elrond  sadly.
It  was  a  cold  grey  day  near  the  end  of  December.
‘Just  what  I  said  myself,’  said  Bilbo.
Now  dark  and 
ominous  it  loomed  up  in  the  night.
Sauron  also  had 
watched  us,  and  had  long  prepared  against  our  stroke,  gov¬ 
erning  Mordor  from  afar  through  Minas  Morgul,  where  his 
Nine  servants  dwelt,  until  all  was  ready.
Doom ,  doom  rolled  the  drum-beats, 
growing  louder  and  louder,  doom ,  doom.
Half  a  mile  northward  along  this  they  came  to  a  lane  opening 
on  their  right.
No  folk  dwell 
here  now,  but  many  other  creatures  live  here  at  all  times, 
especially  birds.
Then  he  seemed  to  see  himself  going  along  a  dim 
passage,  and  climbing  an  endless  winding  stair.
A  madness  took  me, 
but  it  has  passed.
The  race  of  the  Kings  from  over  the  Sea  is  nearly 
at  an  end.
In  that 
time  he  planted  there  the  last  sapling  of  the  White  Tree  in 
memory  of  his  brother.’ 

‘But  in  that  time  also  he  made  this  scroll,’  said  Gandalf; 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


329 


‘and  that  is  not  remembered  in  Gondor,  it  would  seem.
‘I  wonder  if  that  is  Gandalf  coming  after  us,’ 
said  Frodo;  but  even  as  he  said  it,  he  had  a  feeling  that  it  was 
not  so,  and  a  sudden  desire  to  hide  from  the  view  of  the  rider 
came  over  him.
For  on  the 
eve  of  the  sudden  assault  a  dream  came  to  my  brother  in  a 
troubled  sleep;  and  afterwards  a  like  dream  came  oft  to  him 
again,  and  once  to  me.
But  most  of  the  Ores  of  the  Misty  Mountains 
were  scattered  or  destroyed  in  the  Battle  of  Five  Armies.
Let  it  be  a  warning  to  you 
to  be  very  careful  with  it.
Frodo  gave  a  cry  -  and  Tom 
leaned  forward  and  handed  it  back  to  him  with  a  smile.
But  so 
firmly  fixed  had  the  notion  of  the  immeasurable  wealth  of  the 
Bagginses  of  Bag  End  become  that  most  found  this  hard  to 
believe,  harder  than  any  other  reason  or  unreason  that  their 
fancy  could  suggest:  to  most  it  suggested  a  dark  and  yet 
unrevealed  plot  by  Gandalf.
Will  you  go  with  them  and  keep  the  black  men  off?’ 

‘Me?
The  worthies  of  Bree  will  be  dis¬ 
cussing  it  a  hundred  years  hence.’ 

‘I  hope  so,’  said  Strider.
‘Look  on  us  now  with  friendly 
eyes!
‘And  I  reckon  there’s  Elves  and 
Elves.
Will  Haldir  lead  us  all  on  a  string,  like  many  blind 
beggars  with  one  dog?
But 
really  we  cannot  answer  your  question  at  one  hearing!’ 

‘What!’  cried  Bilbo.
Their  height  could  not  be  guessed,  but  they  stood 
up  in  the  twilight  like  living  towers.
Slowly  the  dawn  grew  to  a  pale  light, 
diffused  and  shadowless.
‘But  spooks  or  no 
spooks,  they  won’t  get  in  The  Pony  so  easy.
They  are  only  waiting,  because  they  think  that  their 
purpose  is  almost  accomplished,  and  that  the  Ring  cannot  fly 
much  further.
For  east  or  west  all  woods  must  fail .
How  my  heart  yearns  for 
Minas  Anor  and  the  walls  of  my  own  city!
As  a  matter  of  fact  he  came  out  on  the  right  side  in  the 
end.
Tom  Bombadil’s  house 
and  the  valley,  and  the  Forest  were  lost  to  view.
Suddenly  Tom’s  talk  left  the  woods  and  went  leaping  up 
the  young  stream,  over  bubbling  waterfalls,  over  pebbles  and 
worn  rocks,  and  among  small  flowers  in  close  grass  and  wet 
crannies,  wandering  at  last  up  on  to  the  Downs.
It  was  the  sound  of  water  that  Merry  heard  falling  into  his 
quiet  sleep:  water  streaming  down  gently,  and  then  spreading, 
spreading  irresistibly  all  round  the  house  into  a  dark  shoreless 
pool.
When  they  had  sung  many  songs,  and  talked  of  many 
things  they  had  done  together,  they  toasted  Bilbo’s  birthday, 
and  they  drank  his  health  and  Frodo’s  together  according  to 
Frodo’s  custom.
Only  Aragorn  was  silent  and  restless.
Sam  passed  along  the  path  outside  whistling.
For  Frodo  was  going  on  foot.
My  heart  would  be  glad  if  I  were  beneath  the  eaves  of 
that  wood,  and  it  were  springtime!’ 

‘My  heart  will  be  glad,  even  in  the  winter,’  said  Aragorn.
Then  for  the 
last  time  the  Council  met;  for  now  we  learned  that  he  was 
seeking  ever  more  eagerly  for  the  One.
Night  is  at  hand!’ 

Turning  to  the  others  he  said:  While  I  am  searching,  will 
you  each  make  ready  to  enter  the  Mines?
‘It  is  not  despair,  for 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


351 


despair  is  only  for  those  who  see  the  end  beyond  all  doubt.
GOOD-BYE!
The  landlord  keeps  a  little  dog 
that  is  mighty  fond  of  jokes; 

When  there’s  good  cheer  among  the  guests, 

He  cocks  an  ear  at  all  the  jests 
and  laughs  until  he  chokes.
‘O  Kheled-zaram  fair  and  wonderful!’  said  Gimli.
If  we  cannot  cross  the  mountains,  let  us 
journey  southwards,  until  we  come  to  the  Gap  of  Rohan, 
where  men  are  friendly  to  my  people,  taking  the  road  that  I 
followed  on  my  way  hither.
In  front  of  them  they  saw  the  lower  lands  dotted 
with  small  clumps  of  trees  that  melted  away  in  the  distance 
to  a  brown  woodland  haze.
More  clearly  than  all  else  there  shone 
forth  in  the  middle  of  the  door  a  single  star  with  many  rays.
‘Has  anything  happened?’  he  asked.
I  am  no  more  likely  to  betray 
you  than  Legolas,  or  any  other  of  my  companions.’ 

‘I  do  not  doubt  you,’  said  Hal  dir.
‘If 
I’ve  done  any  harm,  I’m  sorry  indeed.
Actually  his  view  was 
screened  by  a  tall  line  of  beans  on  poles;  but  above  and  far 
beyond  them  the  grey  top  of  the  hill  loomed  up  against  the 
sunrise.
I  will  take  Gildor’s  advice.
Frodo  has  a  better  head  for  that  sort  of  thing.’ 

‘I  need  no  map,’  said  Gimli,  who  had  come  up  with 
Legolas,  and  was  gazing  out  before  him  with  a  strange  light 
in  his  deep  eyes.
‘Must  bathe  feet  a  minute.’ 

Half  in  a  dream  he  wandered  forward  to  the  riverward  side 
of  the  tree,  where  great  winding  roots  grew  out  into  the 
stream,  like  gnarled  dragonets  straining  down  to  drink.
It  was  Pity  that  stayed  his  hand.
From  the  havens  of  Harad  ships  of 
war  put  out  to  sea;  and  out  of  the  East  Men  were  moving 
endlessly:  swordsmen,  spearmen,  bowmen  upon  horses, 
chariots  of  chieftains  and  laden  wains.
But  something  makes 
paths.
‘All  right,  cousin  Frodo!
In  former  days  the  members  of  my  order  had 
been  well  received  there,  but  Saruman  most  of  all.
Sauron  can  put  fire  to  his  evil  uses,  as 
he  can  all  things,  but  these  Riders  do  not  love  it,  and  fear  those 
who  wield  it.
Strider  judged 
that  it  had  fallen  two  days  before,  and  had  washed  away  all 
footprints.
derry  dol!
Frodo  had  a  sudden 
fear  that  in  his  present  mood  he  might  even  mention  the 
Ring;  and  that  might  well  be  disastrous.
But  we 
are  not  high  yet;  we  are  still  far  down,  where  the  paths  are 
usually  open  all  the  winter.’ 

‘I  wonder  if  this  is  a  contrivance  of  the  Enemy,’  said 
Boromir.
It  should  have  been  cast  then  into  Orodruin’s  fire  nigh 
at  hand  where  it  was  made.
You  will  meet  many  foes,  some  open,  and  some 
disguised;  and  you  may  find  friends  upon  your  way  when 
you  least  look  for  it.
It  was  overlaid 
with  a  tracery  of  flowers  and  leaves  wrought  of  silver  and 
gold,  and  on  it  were  set  in  elven-runes  formed  of  many  gems 
the  name  Anduril  and  the  lineage  of  the  sword.
Refuse,  and  things  will  not  seem 
so  well.
‘For  there  are  other 
powers  and  realms  that  you  know  not,  and  they  are  hidden 
from  you.
‘I  did  not  bite, 
and  I  barked  very  little.
And  that  was  peculiar,  as  you  might  say,  seeing  as  we 
were  all  floating  on  the  stream  together.
‘Black  horsemen  have  passed  through  Bree.
Three  dwarves  came  out 
of  different  rooms  where  they  had  been  busy.
The  Seven 
are  taken  or  destroyed.’  At  this  Gloin  stirred,  but  did  not 
speak.
But  whether  they  stay  or  go,  none  can  be  sure  of 
peace.
‘I  was 
very  anxious  to  find  some  sign  of  Gandalf;  but  it  was  a 
mistake  for  three  of  us  to  go  up  and  stand  there  so  long.
‘You  followed  my  lead  almost 
to  disaster  in  the  snow,  and  have  said  no  word  of  blame.
Why  not  be 
free  of  your  doubt  and  fear?
As  he  came  out  of  the  mist  and  their  fears 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS 


127 


subsided,  he  seemed  suddenly  to  diminish  to  ordinary  hobbit- 
size.
For  our  Spring  and  our  Summer 
are  gone  by,  and  they  will  never  be  seen  on  earth  again  save 
in  memory.’ 

Sam  went  red  to  the  ears  and  muttered  something  inaud¬ 
ible,  as  he  clutched  the  box  and  bowed  as  well  as  he  could.
I  guess  that  you  have  been  having  adventures,  which  was  not 
quite  fair  without  me.
At  once  the  Mirror  cleared  and 
he  saw  a  twilit  land.
For  a  moment  Frodo 
thought  that  the  memory  of  stolen  mushrooms  had  been 
aroused,  and  that  the  dogs  would  be  told  to  see  him  off.
Due  north  they  faintly 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS 


179 


glimpsed  a  long  dark  line.
‘But  I  am  frightened;  and  I  do  not 
feel  any  pity  for  Gollum.’ 

‘You  have  not  seen  him,’  Gandalf  broke  in.
He  seemed  to  dwindle  again 
to  an  old  grey  man,  bent  and  troubled.
Upon  great  pedestals  founded  in  the 
deep  waters  stood  two  great  kings  of  stone:  still  with  blurred 
eyes  and  crannied  brows  they  frowned  upon  the  North.
28 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


The  eldest  of  these,  and  Bilbo’s  favourite,  was  young  Frodo 
Baggins.
‘It  is  a 
mithril-coat.
It  would  be  wise,  Gandalf.
And  I  daresay  it  amused  his 
wickedness  to  start  a  game  which  might  end  in  providing  him 
with  an  easy  victim,  but  if  he  lost  would  not  hurt  him.’ 

‘Only  too  true,  I  fear,’  said  Gandalf.
And  sooner  or  later  as  he  lurked  and 
pried  on  the  borders  he  would  be  caught,  and  taken  -  for 
examination.
‘My  master  is  sick  and  wounded,’  said  Sam  angrily.
In  the  meanwhile  what 
are  we  to  do?
He  held  up  his  staff  in  the 
hope  of  finding  some  marks  or  inscription  that  might  help 
his  choice;  but  nothing  of  the  kind  was  to  be  seen.
And,  of  course,  I  make 
up  a  few  songs.
About  them  lay 
many  treasures,  of  gold  maybe,  though  in  that  light  they 
looked  cold  and  unlovely.
He  looked  at  Sting,  and  the  blade 
was  dull.
Frodo  opened  his  eyes  and  saw  that 
Bilbo  was  seated  on  his  stool  in  a  circle  of  listeners,  who  were 
smiling  and  applauding.
But  before  Sam  could  make  up  his  mind 
what  it  was  that  he  saw,  the  light  faded;  and  now  he  thought 
he  saw  Frodo  with  a  pale  face  lying  fast  asleep  under  a  great 
dark  cliff.
But 
they  never  got  tired  of  them.
Now  I  am  wondering  what  can  have 
happened.
Up  this  path 
they  rode.
Before  the  first  day’s  march  was  over  Frodo’s  pain  began 
to  grow  again,  but  he  did  not  speak  of  it  for  a  long  time.
He  remained 
on  visiting  terms  with  his  relatives  (except,  of  course,  the 
Sackville-Bagginses),  and  he  had  many  devoted  admirers 
among  the  hobbits  of  poor  and  unimportant  families.
He’ll  be 
calling  himself  Underhill.
Crazy  about  stories  of  the  old  days,  he  is,  and  he  listens  to 
all  Mr.
Is  that  enough  for  you?
And  I 
shall  not  be  dark,  but  beautiful  and  terrible  as  the  Morning 
and  the  Night!
I  thought  he  was  only  a  Ranger.’ 


288 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Only  a  Ranger!’  cried  Gandalf.
Away  high  in  the  East  swung  Remmirath,  the  Netted  Stars, 
and  slowly  above  the  mists  red  Borgil  rose,  glowing  like  a 
jewel  of  fire.
‘How  the  wind  howls!’ 
he  cried.
Small  hobbit- 
children  ran  after  the  cart  all  through  Hobbiton  and  right  up 
the  hill.
And  the  less  said,  the  sooner  I’ll  drop 
off,  if  you  take  my  meaning.’ 

Frodo  lay  for  some  time  awake,  and  looked  up  at  the  stars 
glinting  through  the  pale  roof  of  quivering  leaves.
He 
seems  to  have  kept  the  title  that  he  took  for  less  than  five 
years.
Once  more  the  desire  to  slip  on  the  Ring  came  over  Frodo; 
but  this  time  it  was  stronger  than  before.
Yet  they  are 
garments,  not  armour,  and  they  will  not  turn  shaft  or  blade.
It  was  now  as  clear  and  far-seen  as 
it  had  been  veiled  and  misty  when  they  stood  upon  the  knoll 
in  the  Forest,  which  could  now  be  seen  rising  pale  and  green 
out  of  the  dark  trees  in  the  West.
A  fox  passing  through  the  wood  on  business  of 
his  own  stopped  several  minutes  and  sniffed.
‘It  does  not  belong  to  either  of  us,’  said  Aragorn;  ‘but  it 
has  been  ordained  that  you  should  hold  it  for  a  while.’ 

‘Bring  out  the  Ring,  Frodo!’  said  Gandalf  solemnly.
Why  do  you  want  me  to?’  he  asked,  and  a  curious  change 
came  over  his  voice.
The  sides  of  the  westward  hills  fell 
into  shadow,  and  the  Sun  grew  round  and  red.
‘I  chose  the  right  way,’  he  said.
None  have  ever  done  so  yet.
‘But  I  do  not  think  that 
any  speech  will  help  me.
‘It  was  that  very  night  of  summer,  yet  moonless  and  star¬ 
less,  that  Ores  came  on  us  at  unawares.
It  seemed  to  him,  somehow,  as  if 
the  suggestion  came  to  him  from  outside,  from  someone  or 
something  in  the  room.
But  he  does  not 
really  want  to,  yet.
‘There  are  many  things 
in  the  deep  waters;  and  seas  and  lands  may  change.
At  the  bottom  of  the  seventh  flight 
Gandalf  halted.
‘Glad  I  am  to  hear  again  the 
wind  in  the  trees!
Yet 
since  that  far  cry  they  had  seen  and  heard  no  sign  that  the 
enemy  had  marked  their  flight  or  followed  them.
We  shall  be  packed  in  a  few  minutes.’ 

Mr.
And  here  you  will  stay, 
Gandalf  the  Grey,  and  rest  from  journeys.
While  they  were  halted,  the  wind  died  down,  and  the 
snow  slackened  until  it  almost  ceased.
After  some  miles,  however,  the  road  ceased  to  roll  up  and 
down:  it  climbed  to  the  top  of  a  steep  bank  in  a  weary 


96 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


zig-zagging  sort  of  way,  and  then  prepared  to  go  down  for 
the  last  time.
He  saw  as  through  a  mist  a  wide 
flat  circle,  paved  with  mighty  flags,  and  surrounded  with  a 
crumbling  battlement;  and  in  the  middle,  set  upon  four 
carven  pillars,  was  a  high  seat,  reached  by  a  stair  of  many 
steps.
Butterbur.
‘He’s  a  caution  and  no  mistake.
And  their  number  is  growing  daily.’ 

‘What  about  Rivendell  and  the  Elves?
Morning  went  on.
‘And  they  tell  us  to  throw  it  away!’  he  cried.
I  shall  have  to  get  my  friend  the  Dunadan  to 
help  me.
Where  have  you  been,  Boromir?’  asked  Aragorn.
It 
would  bring  the  name  of  Baggins  to  their  minds,  especially  if 
there  had  been  inquiries  in  Bree  after  that  name.
However  it  may  prove,  one  must  tread  the  path  that 
need  chooses!’ 

‘I  will  tread  the  path  with  you,  Gandalf!’  said  Gimli.
Tell  me,  who  are  you,  alone,  yourself  and  nameless?
The  hobbits  ran  down 
the  slope.
I  love  the  Shire.
There  are 
older  and  fouler  things  than  Ores  in  the  deep  places  of  the 
world.’  He  did  not  speak  aloud  his  thought  that  whatever  it 
was  that  dwelt  in  the  lake,  it  had  seized  on  Frodo  first  among 
all  the  Company.
‘Now  I’m  off!’ 

They  went  out  into  the  hall.
He  had  not  when  I  departed;  but  that  was  nine  days 
ago,’  answered  Glorfindel.
Even  old  Gandalf.
But  this  way  is  blocked.
‘Come  out,  you  two,  and  let  us  get  away.
They  were  drawing  near  to 
the  grey  hill-country  of  the  Emyn  Muil,  the  southern  march 
of  Wilderland.
There  was  not  time  to  say  so,  but  I  have  never  been  more 
delighted  in  my  life  than  when  you  spoke.
‘Alas!
Amroth  beheld  the  fading  shore 
Now  low  beyond  the  swell, 

And  cursed  the  faithless  ship  that  bore 
Him  far  from  Nimrodel.
O  wind  on  the  waterfall,  and  the  leaves’  laughter!’ 

Suddenly  he  stopped  and  stammered,  overcome  with  sur¬ 
prise  to  hear  himself  saying  such  things.
‘It  is  howling  with  wolf- voices.
‘Did  you  meet  the  beater  of  the  drums?’ 

‘I  do  not  know,’  answered  Gandalf.
The  house  at  Crickhollow  stood  silent.
Go 
quickly  and  choose  paths  leading  right  and  downwards.’ 

‘We  cannot  leave  you  to  hold  the  door  alone!’  said  Aragorn.
With  it  went 
a  quiver  of  arrows.
She  is  walking  in  the  blue  fields  of  the  South,  and  a  little 
wreath  of  snow  on  this  Redhorn  hillock  troubles  her  not  at 
all.
The  sky  was  clean  again.
Old  Maggot  is 
really  a  stout  fellow  -  if  you  leave  his  mushrooms  alone.
‘I  don’t  suppose  you  will  be  able  to  keep  a  diary,  Frodo  my 
lad,  but  I  shall  expect  a  full  account  when  you  get  back.
The  pent  waters  spread  out  into  a  long  oval 
lake,  pale  Nen  Hithoel,  fenced  by  steep  grey  hills  whose  sides 
were  clad  with  trees,  but  their  heads  were  bare,  cold-gleaming 
in  the  sunlight.
Yet  I  had  caught  no  hint  of  anything 
wrong  in  his  voice  or  in  his  eye  at  our  meeting.
All 
other  animals  are  terrified  when  they  draw  near,  even  the 
elf-horse  of  Glorhndel.
And  at  all 
times  they  smell  the  blood  of  living  things,  desiring  and  hating 
it.
One  sign  of  change  that  he  soon  had  noticed  was 
that  he  could  see  more  in  the  dark  than  any  of  his  com¬ 
panions,  save  perhaps  Gandalf.
Rings  he  would  give  for  it, 
such  as  he  gave  of  old.
It  was  impossible  for  Frodo  to  walk,  so  they 
divided  the  greater  part  of  their  baggage  among  the  four  of 
them,  and  put  Frodo  on  the  pony.
It  will  be  watched.
When  he  returned  Sam  and  Pippin  had  got  a  good  fire 
going.
I  took  the  best  horse 
in  his  land,  and  I  have  never  seen  the  like  of  him.’ 

‘Then  he  must  be  a  noble  beast  indeed,’  said  Aragorn;  ‘and 
it  grieves  me  more  than  many  tidings  that  might  seem  worse 
to  learn  that  Sauron  levies  such  tribute.
The  wish  to  wield  it  would  be  too  great  for  my  strength.
At  last  Legolas  turned,  and  seeing  them  now  far  behind, 
he  spoke  to  Aragorn.
He 
went  through  them  all.
The  wind  was  in  his  flowing  hair, 

The  foam  about  him  shone; 

Afar  they  saw  him  strong  and  fair 
Go  riding  like  a  swan.
Some¬ 
thing  to  shut  your  mouth,  and  punish  you  properly  for  listen¬ 
ing.
But  I  would  not  have  come,  had 
I  known  the  danger  of  light  and  joy.
He  was  just  trying  to 
put  poor  Bilbo  off  his  guard.
After  a  time,  as  the  stars  grew  thicker  and 
brighter,  the  feeling  of  disquiet  left  them,  and  they  no  longer 
listened  for  the  sound  of  hoofs.
It  then  seemed  plain  to  us 
that  the  attack  had  been  made  for  his  rescue,  and  that  he  knew 
of  it  beforehand.
‘Oh  yes,  you  do,’  answered  Strider;  ‘but  we  had  better  wait 
until  the  uproar  has  died  down.
And  yet  there  lie  in  his  hoards  many 
records  that  few  even  of  the  lore-masters  now  can  read,  for 
their  scripts  and  tongues  have  become  dark  to  later  men.
We  got  a  sight  of  them  through  the 
tree-trunks.
‘You  cannot  destroy  Ringwraiths  like  that,’  said  Gandalf.
His 
kindly  face  grew  hard.
It  has  been  melted.
We  will  not  speak 
of  such  things  even  in  the  morning  of  the  Shire.
The  cold  stone  is  fallen; 

Dark  door  is  standing  wide;  dead  hand  is  broken.
He  shivered.
It  was  Sam  who  had  insisted  on  choosing  him,  declaring  that 
Bill  (as  he  called  him)  would  pine,  if  he  did  not  come.
A  great 
host  of  Wargs  had  gathered  silently  and  was  now  attacking 
them  from  every  side  at  once.
And  the  years  passed.
‘But  you  shall  be  merry  tonight,  and  listen  to 
your  heart’s  content.
‘That  is  all  that  I  shall  venture  on  for  the  present,’  said 
Gandalf.
A  long  valley  lay  below  them  winding  away  northwards,  until 
it  came  to  an  opening  between  two  steep  shoulders.
Then  they  could  make  straight  for  the  Ferry  over 
country  that  was  open,  except  for  a  few  ditches  and  fences.
But  the  Northern  Lands 
had  long  been  desolate,  and  the  North  Road  was  now  seldom 
used:  it  was  grass-grown,  and  the  Bree-folk  called  it  the 
Greenway.
Or  if  he  refuses,  why  not 
Boromir?
’ 

But  just  as  he  thought,  his  dinner  was  caught, 

He  found  his  hands  had  hold  of  naught.
Late  in  the  night  he  woke.
A 
little  further  on  there  is  a  place  where  we  can  rest  for  a  little.
But 
Farmer  Maggot  took  him  by  the  arm.
And  if  you  are  worrying  about  Black  Riders,  I  can’t 
see  that  it  is  any  worse  meeting  them  on  a  road  than  in  a 
wood  or  a  field.’ 

‘It  is  less  easy  to  find  people  in  the  woods  and  fields,’ 
answered  Frodo.
Suddenly  out  of  a  long  string 
of  nonsense-words  (or  so  they  seemed)  the  voice  rose  up 
loud  and  clear  and  burst  into  this  song: 

Hey!
The 
Enemy  is  fast  becoming  very  strong.
he  says.
And  if  it  were  possible,  one  would  say  that  at  the  last 
Gandalf  fell  from  wisdom  into  folly,  going  needlessly  into  the 
net  of  Moria.’ 

‘He  would  be  rash  indeed  that  said  that  thing,’  said 
Galadriel  gravely.
I  can 
feel  it.
I 
had  already  heard  of  it  from  Gwaihir.
The  twigs  crackled.
‘I  remember 
well  the  splendour  of  their  banners,’  he  said.
‘Hallo!’  said  Pippin.
We  have  seen  you 
often  before  with  Bilbo,  though  you  may  not  have  seen  us.’ 

Who  are  you,  and  who  is  your  lord?’  asked  Frodo.
Out  of  the  gate  in  the  trees  that 
they  had  just  left  rode  a  Black  Rider.
‘Just  now  in  this  room,  of  course,’  answered  the  wizard 
sharply.
When  they  had 
struggled  to  the  bottom  of  the  bank,  they  found  a  stream 
running  down  from  the  hills  behind  in  a  deeply  dug  bed  with 
steep  slippery  sides  overhung  with  brambles.
They  didn’t 
ought  to  be  felled:  it’s  that  avenue  beyond  the  Mill  that  shades 
the  road  to  Bywater.
Its  walls  were  of  clean  stone,  but 
they  were  mostly  covered  with  green  hanging  mats  and  yellow 
curtains.
This  they  followed  for  a  couple  of  miles  as  it 
climbed  up  and  down  into  the  country.
The  night  passed  slowly  and 
wearily.
But  I  say:  let  a  ploughman  plough,  but 
choose  an  otter  for  swimming,  and  for  running  light  over 
grass  and  leaf,  or  over  snow  -  an  Elf.’ 

With  that  he  sprang  forth  nimbly,  and  then  Frodo  noticed 
as  if  for  the  first  time,  though  he  had  long  known  it,  that  the 
Elf  had  no  boots,  but  wore  only  light  shoes,  as  he  always  did, 
and  his  feet  made  little  imprint  in  the  snow.
The  light  of  Sting  is  faint,  and  it 
may  point  to  no  more  than  spies  of  Mordor  roaming  on  the 
slopes  of  Amon  Lhaw.
He  came  out  from 
the  trees  and  walked  towards  them  without  speaking.
Sam 
refused  to  leave  his  master.
He  was  on  a 
dark  heath,  and  there  was  a  strange  salt  smell  in  the  air.
One  by  one 
they  rolled  away,  filled  with  full  but  very  unsatisfied  hobbits.
‘That  was  seventeen  years  ago.
‘The  Moon’s  the  same  in  the  Shire  and  in 
Wilderland,  or  it  ought  to  be.
As  soon  as  Strider  had  roused  them  all,  he  led  the  way  to 
their  bedrooms.
There 
was  a  shriek  and  the  light  vanished.
It  is 
well  that  I  did  so,  for  now  we  have  several  miles  less  to  cross, 
and  haste  is  needed.
‘I  have  looked  on  Moria,  and 
it  is  very  great,  but  it  has  become  dark  and  dreadful;  and  we 
have  found  no  sign  of  my  kindred.
Midyear’s  Day,  Shire  Year, 
1418.
Nai  elye  hiruva.
‘These 
words  shall  go  with  the  gift,’  she  said.
‘And  all  my  beautiful  feather  beds  are  sold  to  the 
Sackville-Bagginses!
Soon  he  came  out  alone  on  the  summit  of  Amon  Hen,  and 
halted,  gasping  for  breath.
‘We’ll  just  wait  long  enough  for 
winter  to  come.’ 

‘That  can’t  be  helped,’  said  Bilbo.
There  is  power,  too,  of  another  kind 
in  the  Shire.
Did  you 
see  my  ring?’  she  asked  turning  again  to  Sam.
‘In  this  evil  hour  I  have  come  on  an  errand  over  many 
dangerous  leagues  to  Elrond:  a  hundred  and  ten  days  I  have 
journeyed  all  alone.
It  goes  round  the  north  end  of  the  Marish  so  as 
to  strike  the  causeway  from  the  Bridge  above  Stock.
They  clothed  him  then  in  elven-white, 
and  seven  lights  before  him  sent, 
as  through  the  Calacirian 
to  hidden  land  forlorn  he  went.
They  heard  eerie 
noises  in  the  darkness  round  them.
At  last  lulled  by  the  wind  in  the  boughs  above,  and 
the  sweet  murmur  of  the  falls  of  Nimrodel  below,  Frodo  fell 
asleep  with  the  song  of  Legolas  running  in  his  mind.
At  the  south  end  of  the  greensward  there  was  an  opening.
Could  that  power  be  defied  by  Bombadil 
alone?
He  will  not  be  long.
There  are  other  powers  at  work  far 
stronger.’ 

‘Well,  I  wish  Frodo  would  “screw  himself  up”  and  come 
back,  and  let  us  get  it  over,’  said  Pippin.
I  knew  the  risk  of  snow,  though  it  seldom  falls 
heavily  so  far  south,  save  high  up  in  the  mountains.
I  have  tried  to  catch 
him  once  or  twice  at  night;  but  he  is  slier  than  a  fox,  and  as 
slippery  as  a  fish.
In  peace  and  quiet,  without  a  lot  of  relatives 
prying  around,  and  a  string  of  confounded  visitors  hanging 
on  the  bell.
The  Company  stared  in  wonder.
They  saw  no  living  thing,  and  not  a  bird  was  in  the  sky;  but 
what  the  night  would  bring,  if  it  caught  them  in  that  lost  land, 
none  of  them  cared  to  think.
‘Few  now  remember  them,’  Tom  murmured,  ‘yet  still 
some  go  wandering,  sons  of  forgotten  kings  walking  in  lone¬ 
liness,  guarding  from  evil  things  folk  that  are  heedless.’ 

The  hobbits  did  not  understand  his  words,  but  as  he  spoke 
they  had  a  vision  as  it  were  of  a  great  expanse  of  years  behind 
them,  like  a  vast  shadowy  plain  over  which  there  strode 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS  191 

shapes  of  Men,  tall  and  grim  with  bright  swords,  and  last 
came  one  with  a  star  on  his  brow.
They  heard  my  voice  across  the  Nimrodel,  and 
knew  that  I  was  one  of  their  Northern  kindred,  and  therefore 
they  did  not  hinder  our  crossing;  and  afterwards  they  heard 
my  song.
There  was  a  roar  and  a  crackle,  and  the  tree  above  him 


390 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


burst  into  a  leaf  and  bloom  of  blinding  flame.
Then  the  shapes  slowly  advanced.
I  wish  you  could  have  held 
out  at  Weathertop.’ 

‘You  seem  to  know  a  great  deal  already,’  said  Frodo.
‘I  am  wide  awake  now,  and  I 
remember  so  many  things  that  want  explaining.
‘The  enemy  is  here!’ 

Hastily  they  crept  away  and  slipped  down  the  north  side 
of  the  hill  to  find  their  companions.
But  whether 
those  two  lamps  spotted  me  moving  and  staring,  or  whether 
I  came  to  my  senses,  I  don’t  know.
The  evil  that  was 
devised  long  ago  works  on  in  many  ways,  whether  Sauron 
himself  stands  or  falls.
‘There 
seem  only  to  have  been  five  of  the  enemy.
For  a  moment,  perfectly 
balanced  between  their  piercing  points,  he  writhed,  tor¬ 
mented.
Call  us,  if  anything  is  amiss!
‘The  ring  as  well?
And  I  warn  you  that  peril 
is  now  both  before  you  and  behind  you,  and  upon  either 
side.’ 

‘You  mean  the  Riders?
They  themselves 
do  not  see  the  world  of  light  as  we  do,  but  our  shapes  cast 
shadows  in  their  minds,  which  only  the  noon  sun  destroys; 
and  in  the  dark  they  perceive  many  signs  and  forms  that  are 
hidden  from  us:  then  they  are  most  to  be  feared.
‘  “I  come  from  yonder,”  he  said,  slow  and  stiff-like, 
pointing  back  west,  over  my  fields,  if  you  please.
But  either  it’s  out  of  its  running, 
or  I’m  all  wrong  in  my  reckoning.
We 
will  see  what - ’ 

Doom ,  doom  came  the  drum-beat  and  the  walls  shook.
In 
the  days  of  the  great  kings  there  were  high  seats  upon  them, 
and  watch  was  kept  there.
Baggins  himself  -  that 
Frodo’s  money  was  running  out:  he  was  going  to  leave 
Hobbiton  and  live  in  a  quiet  way  on  the  proceeds  of  the  sale 
down  in  Buckland  among  his  Brandybuck  relations.
I  had  learned  that  he  was  carrying 
out  of  the  Shire,  well,  a  secret  that  concerned  me  and  my 
friends.
Have  you  seen  him?’  said  a  muffled 
voice  -  but  the  voice  was  the  voice  of  Merry  Brandybuck.
The  voice  of  Rauros 
was  a  mighty  roaring  mingled  with  a  deep  throbbing  boom.
A 
mile  or  two  further  south  they  hastily  crossed  the  great  road 
from  the  Brandywine  Bridge;  they  were  now  in  the  Tookland 
and  bending  south-eastwards  they  made  for  the  Green  Hill 
Country.
They  were  blackened  as  if  with  fire.
I  am  bruised  and  in  pain,  but  it  is  not  too  bad.’ 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  KHAZAD-DUM  427 

‘Well,’  said  Aragorn,  ‘I  can  only  say  that  hobbits  are  made 
of  a  stuff  so  tough  that  I  have  never  met  the  like  of  it.
Clear  are  thy  eyes  and  bright  thy  breath!
So  my  doubt  slept  -  but  uneasily.
What’s  more,  it  wasn’t  a  log,  for  it  had 
paddle-feet,  like  a  swan’s  almost,  only  they  seemed  bigger, 
and  kept  dipping  in  and  out  of  the  water.
But  there  seemed  to  be  a  note  of 
haste  or  fear  in  his  call,  and  they  saw  that  he  was  now  speaking 
quickly  and  urgently  to  Strider.
They  had  been  a  fortnight  on  the  way  when  the  weather 
changed.
There  was  the  old  wizard, 
sitting  in  a  chair  by  the  open  window.
Rauros  was  roaring  with  a  great 


514  THE  fellowship  of  the  ring 

voice.
Sam  was  behind  him,  and  after  him  came 
Pippin,  and  then  Merry.
Indeed  so  much  did  Tom  know,  and  so  cunning  was  his 
questioning,  that  Frodo  found  himself  telling  him  more  about 
Bilbo  and  his  own  hopes  and  fears  than  he  had  told  before 


174 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


even  to  Gandalf.
You  had  better  keep  it,  Gimli,  and  take  it  back  to  Dain,  if 
you  get  a  chance.
But  that  evening,  as  Sam  was  walking 
home  and  twilight  was  fading,  there  came  the  once  familiar 
tap  on  the  study  window.
Even  now  it  will  be  dark  before  we  can 
reach  the  Ferry.’ 

‘Ah!
And  Elves,  sir!
‘But  I  am  glad  that  the  shadow  came 
no  nearer.
“As  a  small  token  only  of  your 
friendship  Sauron  asks  this,”  he  said:  “that  you  should  find 
this  thief,”  such  was  his  word,  “and  get  from  him,  willing  or 
no,  a  little  ring,  the  least  of  rings,  that  once  he  stole.
They  now  went  on  again.
And  one  that  is  long  and  strong  and 
light.
It  climbed  on  to  the  shadowy  horse  and  seemed  to 
vanish  across  the  lane  into  the  darkness  on  the  other  side.
No  one  fives  in  this 
land.
In  Rohan  I  found  evil  already  at  work:  the  lies  of 
Saruman;  and  the  king  of  the  land  would  not  listen  to  my 
warnings.
A  red  light  was  on  their  tired  and  anxious  faces; 
behind  them  the  night  was  like  a  black  wall.
Unless  the 
weather  changes  once  more  and  cheats  us,  we  shall  have  a 
good  chance  of  slipping  through,  unseen  by  any  eyes  on  the 
eastern  shore.
From  out  of  the  shadow  a  red  sword  leaped  flaming.
I 
would  not  abandon  our  boats  until  we  must.
But  they  were  not  made  as  weapons  of 
war  or  conquest:  that  is  not  their  power.
Few 
have  ever  come  hither  through  greater  peril  or  on  an  errand 
more  urgent.’ 

He  then  pointed  out  and  named  those  whom  Frodo  had 
not  met  before.
Wait!’ 

It  was  no  good.
So  small  a  thing!
The  sooner  we  go  back  and  down  the  better.’ 

To  this  all  agreed,  but  their  retreat  was  now  difficult.
‘Let  Frodo  come  next  and  with  him 
Legolas.
They 
were  not  more  than  a  yard  or  two  away,  and  Frodo  heard  the 
soft  hiss  of  intaken  breath.
They  filled 
their  bottles  and  the  small  camping  kettle  at  a  little  fall  where 
the  water  fell  a  few  feet  over  an  outcrop  of  grey  stone.
His 
head  seemed  sunk  in  sleep  on  his  breast,  and  a  fold  of  his 
dark  cloak  was  drawn  over  his  face.
And  he  wrote 
poetry.
The  others  followed;  but  Gimli  had  to  be  dragged  away  by 
Legolas:  in  spite  of  the  peril  he  lingered  by  Balin’ s  tomb  with 
his  head  bowed.
Do  you  refuse?” 

‘At  that  his  breath  came  like  the  hiss  of  snakes,  and  all  who 
stood  by  shuddered,  but  Dain  said:  “I  say  neither  yea  nor 
nay.
Make  haste  while  the  Sun  shines!’ 
And  to  Frodo  she  said:  ‘Farewell,  Elf-friend,  it  was  a  merry 
meeting!’ 

But  Frodo  found  no  words  to  answer.
Ponies  all!
‘The  Wood-elves  tracked  him  first,  an  easy  task  for  them, 
for  his  trail  was  still  fresh  then.
But  we  must  delay  no  longer.’ 

Elrond  summoned  the  hobbits  to  him.
But  that  is 
now  so  long  ago  that  the  hills  have  forgotten  them,  though  a 
shadow  still  lies  on  the  land.’ 

‘Where  did  you  learn  such  tales,  if  all  the  land  is  empty 
and  forgetful?’  asked  Peregrin.
‘I  have  heard  all  about  Sam,’  he  said.
‘The  road  goes  on  for  ever,’  said  Pippin;  ‘but  I  can’t  with¬ 
out  a  rest.
On  every 
item  there  was  a  label  tied.
‘Well,  here  we  are  again  at  last!’  said 
Frodo.
He  had  a 
strange  feeling  as  the  slow  gurgling  stream  slipped  by:  his  old 
life  lay  behind  in  the  mists,  dark  adventure  lay  in  front.
Wherever  he  came  a 
madness  filled  our  foes,  but  fear  fell  on  our  boldest,  so  that 
horse  and  man  gave  way  and  fled.
‘  “I  can’t  abide  changes,”  said  he,  “not  at  my  time  of  life, 
and  least  of  all  changes  for  the  worst.”  “Changes  for  the 
worst,”  he  repeated  many  times.
One 
smote  Frodo  between  the  shoulders  and  he  lurched  forward 
with  a  cry,  letting  go  his  paddle:  but  the  arrow  fell  back, 
foiled  by  his  hidden  coat  of  mail.
For  the  moment  there  was  no  whispering  or 
movement  among  the  branches;  but  they  all  got  an  uncom¬ 
fortable  feeling  that  they  were  being  watched  with  dis¬ 
approval,  deepening  to  dislike  and  even  enmity.
‘I  am  sleepy  after  so 
much  music  and  singing.
‘Now,  Mr.
‘Nonsense,  Lindir,’  snorted  Bilbo.
Frodo  gazed  fixedly  at  the  red  embers  on  the  hearth,  until 
they  filled  all  his  vision,  and  he  seemed  to  be  looking  down 
into  profound  wells  of  fire.
Come  Frodo,  there!
Rover!
‘When  I  read  these  words,  my  quest  was  ended.
That’s  over!’  said  the  wizard  struggling  to  his 
feet.
When  he  reached  the  nearest 
house,  more  than  a  mile  away,  he  collapsed  on  the  doorstep.
Black  Riders  would  have  to 
ride  over  him  to  get  near  the  waggon.
‘It  seems  that  he  has  a  power  even  over 
the  Ring.’ 

‘No,  I  should  not  put  it  so,’  said  Gandalf.
Just  in  front 
of  him  Pippin  fell  forward  on  to  his  knees.
Tonight  we  shall  be  on  our 
way  high  up  towards  the  Redhorn  Gate.
Some,  doubtless, 
were  no  better  than  tramps,  ready  to  dig  a  hole  in  any  bank 
and  stay  only  as  long  as  it  suited  them.
Yet  even  the  most  subtle  spiders  may 
leave  a  weak  thread.
That  name  will  not  be  safe  to  have,  outside  the 
Shire  or  in  the  Wild.
After  a  while  Boromir  returned  carrying  Sam.
Ah!
The  Ring  would  give  me  power  of  Command.
rolled  out  the  song  to  greet  them.
There  was  no  tree 
nor  any  visible  water:  it  was  a  country  of  grass  and  short 
springy  turf,  silent  except  for  the  whisper  of  the  air  over  the 
edges  of  the  land,  and  high  lonely  cries  of  strange  birds.
Then  there  was  a  dead  silence,  until  suddenly,  after  several 
deep  breaths,  every  Baggins,  Boffin,  Took,  Brandybuck, 
Grubb,  Chubb,  Burrows,  Bolger,  Bracegirdle,  Brockhouse, 
Goodbody,  Hornblower,  and  Proudfoot  began  to  talk  at  once.
For 
a  moment  Frodo  stood  near  the  brink  and  let  the  water  flow 
over  his  tired  feet.
A  wind  by  night  in  Northern  lands 
Arose,  and  loud  it  cried, 

And  drove  the  ship  from  elven-strands 
Across  the  streaming  tide.
Cries  of  Yes  (and  No).
‘But  there  was  some¬ 
thing  else  in  it,  I  think,  which  you  don’t  see  yet.
This  came  chiefly  from 
a  blazing  log-fire,  for  the  three  lamps  hanging  from  the  beams 
were  dim,  and  half  veiled  in  smoke.
Troll’s  old  seat  is  still  the  same, 

And  the  bone  he  boned  from  its  owner!
And 
don’t  be  too  long!
Frodo  began  to  feel  restless,  and  the  old  paths  seemed  too 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


57 


well-trodden.
Time  went  on, 
and  still  he  was  no  nearer  to  a  choice.
Come  along!
Yet  beneath  the  Sun  all  things  must  wear  to  an 
end  at  last.’ 

‘But  the  wearing  is  slow  in  Lorien,’  said  Frodo.
When  Bilbo  was  ninety-nine  he  adopted  Frodo  as 
his  heir,  and  brought  him  to  live  at  Bag  End;  and  the  hopes  of 
the  Sackville-Bagginses  were  finally  dashed.
Elves  here,  and  Elves  there!
And  for  all  that  walk 
the  world  in  these  after-days.
‘You  have 
eaten  enough  already  for  a  long  day’s  march.’ 

‘I  thought  it  was  only  a  kind  of  cram,  such  as  the  Dale-men 
make  for  journeys  in  the  wild,’  said  the  Dwarf.
Even  in  the  light  of  morning  he  felt  the  dark 
shadow  of  the  tidings  that  Gandalf  had  brought.
The  Elves  dearly  loved  it,  and 
among  many  uses  they  made  of  it  ithildin ,  starmoon,  which 
you  saw  upon  the  doors.
Then  suddenly  he 
stopped,  and  they  saw  that  he  nodded  as  if  he  was  falling 
asleep.
And  you,  Mr.
‘More  than  ever.
They 
had  been  in  fear  of  pursuit  for  so  long  that  any  sound  from 
behind  seemed  ominous  and  unfriendly.
Wake  and  hear  me  calling!
O  stars  that  in  the  Sunless  Year 

With  shining  hand  by  her  were  sown, 

In  windy  fields  now  bright  and  clear 
We  see  your  silver  blossom  blown!
Soon  even  Boromir 
found  it  hard  to  keep  going.
Such  loveliness  in  living  thing  Frodo  had  never  seen  before 
nor  imagined  in  his  mind;  and  he  was  both  surprised  and 
abashed  to  find  that  he  had  a  seat  at  Elrond’ s  table  among  all 
these  folk  so  high  and  fair.
‘But  as  he  lowered  his  eyes,  he  saw  far  ahead  the  tops  of 
the  Misty  Mountains,  out  of  which  the  stream  came.
I  haven’t  got  six  legs,  nor  six  eyes 
neither!
Nothing 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED  131 

could  be  seen  of  the  house  in  the  dark:  it  stood  back  from 
the  lane  in  the  middle  of  a  wide  circle  of  lawn  surrounded  by 
a  belt  of  low  trees  inside  the  outer  hedge.
Frodo  could  hear  his  heart 
beating.
He 
waited  for  an  opportunity,  when  the  talk  was  going  again, 
and  Tom  was  telling  an  absurd  story  about  badgers  and  their 
queer  ways  -  then  he  slipped  the  Ring  on.
‘When  will  the  day  come  of  our 
revenge?
‘For  morning 
it  is  again  at  last.
He’s  been 
slack  lately,  and  he’ll  feel  the  weight  less  when  he’s  walked 
off  some  of  his  own.’ 

‘Be  land  to  a  poor  old  hobbit!’  laughed  Frodo.
When  they  came  to  the  arch  Gandalf  went  through,  signing 
to  them  to  wait.
Anduin  is  wide,  yet  the  ores 
can  shoot  their  arrows  far  across  the  stream;  and  of  late,  it  is 
said,  they  have  dared  to  cross  the  water  and  raid  the  herds 
and  studs  of  Rohan.’ 

Sam  looked  from  bank  to  bank  uneasily.
‘He  had 
suffered  much.
‘We  are  departing  as  quickly 
as  we  may!’  And  indeed  with  that  last  stroke  the  malice  of  the 
mountain  seemed  to  be  expended,  as  if  Caradhras  was  satisfied 
that  the  invaders  had  been  beaten  off  and  would  not  dare  to 
return.
‘Sam!’  he  called.
‘How 
surprised  Bilbo  would  have  been  to  see  all  the  changes  in  the 
Desolation  of  Smaug!’ 

Gloin  looked  at  Frodo  and  smiled.
At  length  he  spoke.
‘  “Stay  a  moment!”  I  said.
‘Here  is  a  friend 
that  you  have  long  missed.’ 

The  dark  figure  raised  its  head  and  uncovered  its  face.
Fool,  take  it  off!
But  still  we  fight  on, 
holding  all  the  west  shores  of  Anduin;  and  those  who  shelter 
behind  us  give  us  praise,  if  ever  they  hear  our  name:  much 
praise  but  little  help.
Gandalf!’  cried  Sam,  angry  and  distressed.
A  loon  is  he  that  will  not  sing: 

O!
You  do  not  know  what  is  inside  yet.
‘Don’t  try!’  said  the  old  hobbit,  turning  round  and  slapping 
him  on  the  back.
And  he  is  bound  up  with  the  fate  of 
the  Ring.
The  Riders  made  straight  for  you,  as  soon  as 
you  fled.
As  the  road  climbed  upwards,  Frodo’s 
spirits  rose  a  little;  but  he  still  felt  oppressed,  and  still  at  times 
he  heard,  or  thought  he  heard,  away  behind  the  Company 
and  beyond  the  fall  and  patter  of  their  feet,  a  following  foot¬ 
step  that  was  not  an  echo.
All  that  is  gold  does  not  glitter,  not  all  those  who  wander  are  lost .’ 

‘Did  the  verses  apply  to  you  then?’  asked  Frodo.
merry  doll  ring  a  dong  dillo!
Since  we  took  to  boats,  he  has  been  lying  on  a 
log  and  paddling  with  hands  and  feet.
They  were  in  a  long  low  room,  filled  with 
the  light  of  lamps  swinging  from  the  beams  of  the  roof;  and 
on  the  table  of  dark  polished  wood  stood  many  candles,  tall 
and  yellow,  burning  brightly.
I  am 
as  happy  now  as  I  have  ever  been,  and  that  is  saying  a  great 
deal.
‘Look  this 
way  first!’  he  said.
Or  was  it:  Verily 
I  come,  I  come  to  you ?
My  people  ride  out  there  now  and  again.’ 

‘It  may  be  all  we  could  wish,’  said  Frodo;  ‘but  it  is  outside 
the  Shire  all  the  same.
A  fact  which  partly 
explains  young  Frodo’s  long  expeditions  to  the  renowned 
fields  of  the  Marish,  and  the  wrath  of  the  injured  Maggot.
Nothing  seems  to  be 
going  on,  and  nobody  seems  to  want  it  to.
The  horse  stepped  forward,  walking  slowly  at  first, 
and  then  breaking  into  a  quick  trot.
'Don’t  you  leave  him!
‘You 
let  them  out  again,  Old  Man  Willow!’  he  said.
Yonder  stands  Barazinbar, 
the  Redhorn,  cruel  Caradhras;  and  beyond  him  are  Silvertine 
and  Cloudyhead:  Celebdil  the  White,  and  Fanuidhol  the 
Grey,  that  we  call  Zirakzigil  and  Bundushathur.
Quite  simple.
Still  I  for 
one  am  glad  that  he  is  safely  kept  by  the  watchful  Elves  of 
Mirkwood.
They  smiled  at  him  and  said  laughing:  ‘Here 
is  a  jewel  among  hobbits!’ 

After  a  while  Pippin  fell  fast  asleep,  and  was  lifted  up  and 
borne  away  to  a  bower  under  the  trees;  there  he  was  laid 
upon  a  soft  bed  and  slept  the  rest  of  the  night  away.
‘You’re  always  popping  up.
The  wind  began  to  hiss  over  the 
grass.
We  have  done  our  best  in  a  short  time  to  make 
it  look  like  home.
I  have  got  something  to  tell  you  all.
In  fact  long  ago  they  attacked  the  Hedge:  they 
came  and  planted  themselves  right  by  it,  and  leaned  over  it.
And  there 
was  also  one  last  surprise,  in  honour  of  Bilbo,  and  it  startled 
the  hobbits  exceedingly,  as  Gandalf  intended.
I  should  like  a  bite  and  a  sup,  but  somehow  I 
think  we  had  better  move  on  from  here.
And  he 
thought  suddenly:  “It  would  be  cool  and  shady  under  those 
mountains.
Their  paths  now  went  into  thickets  where  the  dusk  had 
already  gathered.
There  they  stood  and  gazed  about 
them.
The  world  is  grey,  the  mountains  old, 

The  forge’s  fire  is  ashen-cold; 

No  harp  is  wrung,  no  hammer  falls: 

The  darkness  dwells  in  Durin’s  halls; 

The  shadow  lies  upon  his  tomb 
In  Moria,  in  Khazad-dum.
‘Regiments  of  black  crows  are  flying  over  all  the  land 
between  the  Mountains  and  the  Greyflood,’  he  said,  ‘and 
they  have  passed  over  Hollin.
The  further  you  go,  the  less 
easy  will  it  be  to  withdraw;  yet  no  oath  or  bond  is  laid  on  you 
to  go  further  than  you  will.
I  am  going  with  him,  if  he  climbs  to  the 
Moon ;  and  if  any  of  those  Black  Riders  try  to  stop  him,  they’ll 
have  Sam  Gamgee  to  reckon  with,  I  said.
F 

PS.
I  can  find  someone,  I  said,  tomorrow, 
maybe,  or  the  day  after.
The 
flicker  for  a  moment  showed  his  sharp  nose,  and  the  puff  of 
smoke.
There 
was  no  sign  of  the  Elves.
His  money  was  got  in  some 
strange  fashion  in  foreign  parts,  they  say.
What  sort  of  a  fellow  was  he?
‘I  wish  I 
had  waited  and  explored  the  ground  down  here  myself,’  he 
said,  hurrying  off  to  the  spring  to  examine  the  footprints.
PPPS.
Sam  was  the  only  member  of  the 
party  who  had  not  been  over  the  river  before.
So  they  called  him  Golhim, 
and  cursed  him,  and  told  him  to  go  far  away;  and  his  grand- 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST  71 

mother,  desiring  peace,  expelled  him  from  the  family  and 
turned  him  out  of  her  hole.
And  thither  we  are  going 
against  my  wish.
As  they  looked  out  of  the  window  there  came  falling  gently 
as  if  it  was  flowing  down  the  rain  out  of  the  sky,  the  clear 
voice  of  Goldberry  singing  up  above  them.
In  the  darkness  they  caught  the  white  glimmer 
of  foam,  where  the  river  flowed  over  a  short  fall.
What  has  happened?
No,  I  was  not 
troubled  about  dear  Bilbo  any  more,  once  he  had  let  the  thing 
go.
White 
cloth  may  be  dyed.
The  sun  rose.
There  seemed  to  be  less  fog  on  the  further  side.
But  the  snakes  were  too  much  for  him.
‘Wait  for  us  one  day.
‘No,  no,  no!’  he  was  crying.
‘I  have  merely  begun 
to  wonder  about  the  ring,  especially  since  last  night.
He  then  went  into  his  study,  and  from  a  large 
strong-box  took  out  a  bundle  wrapped  in  old  cloths,  and  a 
leather-bound  manuscript;  and  also  a  large  bulky  envelope.
Strider  walked  forward  unconcernedly.
‘But  where  the  warg  howls,  there  also  the  ore  prowls.’ 

‘I  wish  I  had  taken  Elrond’s  advice,’  muttered  Pippin  to 
Sam.
For  it  shows  things  that  were,  and  things 
that  are,  and  things  that  yet  may  be.
Merry, 
of  all  people,  was  on  the  right  track.
LOTHLORIEN 


449 


A  head  appeared  suddenly  through  the  hole  in  the  flet.
The  light  of  the  clear  autumn 
morning  was  now  glowing  in  the  valley.
At  first  he 
thought  that  he  had  slept  late,  after  a  long  unpleasant  dream 
that  still  hovered  on  the  edge  of  memory.
Terror  seized  him.
O  Elbereth!
They  were 
more  interested  in  Sam  and  Pippin,  who  were  now  feeling 
quite  at  home,  and  were  chatting  gaily  about  events  in  the 
Shire.
Just  as  he  reached  the  little  lawn  among  the  rowans  he  over¬ 
took  him,  toiling  uphill,  panting  and  calling,  Frodo!
We  must  send  the  Ring  to  the  Fire.’ 

Silence  fell  again.
They  seem  to 
like  them  as  much  as  food,  or  more.
‘Dark  is  the  water  of  Kheled-zaram,  and  cold  are  the 
springs  of  Kibil-nala,  and  fair  were  the  many-pillared  halls  of 
Khazad-dum  in  Elder  Days  before  the  fall  of  mighty  lungs 
beneath  the  stone.’  She  looked  upon  Gimli,  who  sat  glowering 
and  sad,  and  she  smiled.
I  had  dreaded  this  evening.’ 

‘Good!
‘You  did  not  wish  to  see  Elf-magic  and  were  content.’ 

‘Do  you  advise  me  to  look?’  asked  Frodo.
With  it  was  a  belt  of  pearl  and 
crystal.
Not  all  the  faces  were  friendly,  nor  all  the 
words  that  were  shouted.
Will  they 
not  say?’ 

The  Elves  returned  no  answer.
Suddenly 
he  saw  or  felt  a  shadow  pass  over  the  high  stars,  as  if  for  a 
moment  they  faded  and  then  flashed  out  again.
They 
fled  across  it.
Every  now  and 
again  they  made  efforts  to  speak  of  other  things,  of  their 
long  road  and  many  adventures;  they  questioned  Aragorn 
concerning  the  realm  of  Gondor  and  its  ancient  history,  and 
the  remnants  of  its  great  works  that  could  still  be  seen  in  this 
strange  border-land  of  the  Emyn  Muil:  the  stone  kings  and 
the  seats  of  Lhaw  and  Hen,  and  the  great  Stair  beside  the 
falls  of  Rauros.
Now  be  quiet!’ 

Nothing  more  was  heard  for  several  minutes;  but  then 
there  came  out  of  the  depths  faint  knocks:  tom-tap ,  tap-tom.
‘But  that,  of  course,  would  only  make  the  evil  part  of  him 
angrier  in  the  end  -  unless  it  could  be  conquered.
There  beryl,  pearl,  and  opal  pale, 

And  metal  wrought  like  fishes’  mail, 

Buckler  and  corslet,  axe  and  sword.
‘  “Strider!”  I  cried,  shouting  for  joy.
‘Ores!’  cried  Gimli.
314 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


And  then  his  fell  voice  was  lowered,  and  he  would  have 
sweetened  it  if  he  could.
‘Now  what  does 
that  remind  me  of?
Glorfmdel  and  Strider  followed  as  rearguard.
You’d  make  some  folic  pay  for  their  dirty  work.’ 

‘I  would,’  she  said.
There  is  no  hope 
of  escape  that  way.’ 

‘And  no  hope  at  all,  if  they  come  at  the  other  door  as  well,’ 
said  Boromir.
like  gold  fall  the  leaves  in  the  wind,  long  years  number¬ 
less  as  the  wings  of  trees!
He  had  slept  the  night  away,  and  the  grey  of  morning  was 
dim  among  the  bare  branches.
Fie  unfastened  it 
and  handed  it  slowly  to  the  wizard.
As  they  were  swept  aside  the  travellers  could  see,  now  very 
close,  the  pale  foam  of  the  River  lashing  against  sharp  rocks 
that  were  thrust  out  far  into  the  stream  like  a  ridge  of  teeth.
It  was  a  long  and  merry  meal.
It  is  a 
fair  song  in  our  woodland  tongue;  but  this  is  how  it  runs  in 
the  Westron  Speech,  as  some  in  Rivendell  now  sing  it.’  In  a 
soft  voice  hardly  to  be  heard  amid  the  rustle  of  the  leaves 
above  them  he  began: 


442 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


An  Elven-maid  there  was  of  old, 

A  shining  star  by  day: 

Her  mantle  white  was  hemmed  with  gold, 
Her  shoes  of  silver-grey.
It  has  seldom  been  heard  of  that  Gandalf  the  Grey  sought 
for  aid,  one  so  cunning  and  so  wise,  wandering  about  the 
lands,  and  concerning  himself  in  every  business,  whether  it 
belongs  to  him  or  not.” 

‘I  looked  at  him  and  wondered.
He  told  them  not  to  be  afraid 
-  but  to  mind  their  own  business.
Still  Sam  seems  right  in  this:  I  don’t  see 
why  you  should  warn  us  to  take  care,  and  yet  ask  us  to  take 
you  on  trust.
‘Where  are  you?’  he  cried  again,  both  angry  and  afraid.
A  new  hour 
comes.
He  stood  gazing  for  a  moment,  stock-still,  gaping.
Nowhere  are  there  any  men  so  friendly 
to  us  as  the  Men  of  Dale.
In  that  way 
they  would,  if  all  went  well,  cut  off  a  great  loop  of  the  Road, 
which  further  on  bent  southwards  to  avoid  the  Midgewater 
Marshes.
The  Moon,  now  at  the  full,  rose  over  the  mountains,  and  cast 
a  pale  light  in  which  the  shadows  of  stones  were  black.
Get  breakfast  ready 
for  half-past  nine!
‘Do  not 
be  afraid!
They  went  without  lights  and  took  it 
slowly.
A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED 


139 


With  foes  ahead,  behind  us  dread, 

Beneath  the  sky  shall  be  our  bed, 

Until  at  last  our  toil  be  passed, 

Our  journey  done,  our  errand  sped.
I  still  don’t 
understand  what  all  this  has  to  do  with  Bilbo  and  myself,  and 
our  ring.’ 

‘It  has  everything  to  do  with  it,’  said  Gandalf.
‘Half  an  hour,  maybe,’  he  answered.
‘Well  no;  but  I  have  heard  something  that  has  made  me 
anxious  and  needs  looking  into.
What  have  I  done?
‘Yes.
‘It  was  my  lot  to  take  the  Road,  and  I  came  to  the  Bridge 
of  Mitheithel,  and  left  a  token  there,  nigh  on  seven  days  ago.
They  then  struggled  frantically  to  pull  open  the  jaws 
of  the  crack  that  held  poor  Merry.
Now  at  any  rate  he 
is  as  bad  as  an  Ore,  and  just  an  enemy.
The  stay  in  Rivendell  had  worked  a  great  wonder  of  change 
on  him:  he  was  glossy  and  seemed  to  have  the  vigour  of  youth.
The  purchase  of  provisions 
fell  almost  to  nothing  throughout  the  district  in  the  ensuing 
weeks;  but  as  Bilbo’s  catering  had  depleted  the  stocks  of  most 
of  the  stores,  cellars  and  warehouses  for  miles  around,  that 
did  not  matter  much.
Otherwise,  he  might  live  on  for  years,  quite  happily:  just  stop 
as  he  was  when  he  parted  with  it.
We 
shall  all  rue  it  bitterly,  I  fear.
‘Look  not  too  far  ahead!
A  cool  air  flowed  in;  it  had  a  rainy 
smell.
You  could  have  stayed  here  and  et  the  best  hay  till  the 
new  grass  comes.’  Bill  swished  his  tail  and  said  nothing.
It  is  a  rich  and  pleasant  land,  and  its  grass 
has  no  rival;  but  in  these  evil  days  folk  do  not  dwell  by  the 
River  or  ride  often  to  its  shores.
But  Minas  Tirith  is  no  nearer  to  the  Fire 
and  the  destruction  of  the  Burden.
What  roads  would  any  dare  to  tread,  what 
safety  would  there  be  in  quiet  lands,  or  in  the  homes  of  simple 
men  at  night,  if  the  Dunedain  were  asleep,  or  were  all  gone 
into  the  grave?
Amon  Lhaw  it  touched.
Barrow-wights  walked  in 
the  hollow  places  with  a  clinic  of  rings  on  cold  fingers,  and 
gold  chains  in  the  wind.
‘I  think  I 
understand  things  better  now,’  he  said  in  a  low  voice.
Next  to  Frodo  on  his  right  sat  a  dwarf  of  important  appear¬ 
ance,  richly  dressed.
It  was  actually  pleasant,  I  think,  to  hear  a  kindly 
voice  again,  bringing  up  memories  of  wind,  and  trees,  and 
sun  on  the  grass,  and  such  forgotten  things.
He 
had  a  blue  coat  and  a  long  brown  beard;  his  eyes  were  blue 
and  bright,  and  his  face  was  red  as  a  ripe  apple,  but  creased 
into  a  hundred  wrinkles  of  laughter.
This  is  what  I  have 
really  been  longing  for,  for  years!
she  was  shrunken:  a 
slender  elf-woman,  clad  in  simple  white,  whose  gentle  voice 
was  soft  and  sad.
he  cried,  and  struck  the  rock  with  his  staff.
Snow-white!
People  don’t  go  in  there.’ 

‘Oh  yes  they  do!’  said  Merry.
It  was  decided  that  Aragorn  and  Legolas  should  at  once  go 
forward  along  the  shore,  while  the  others  remained  by  the 
boats.
The  heart  of  Legolas  was  running  under  the  stars  of  a 
summer  night  in  some  northern  glade  amid  the  beech-woods; 
Gimli  was  fingering  gold  in  his  mind,  and  wondering  if  it 
were  fit  to  be  wrought  into  the  housing  of  the  Lady’s  gift.
Sweet  was  her  singing  then,  and  her  heart  was  beating!
He  felt  that  the  Company  was  too  naked,  afloat  in  little  open 
boats  in  the  midst  of  shelterless  lands,  and  on  a  river  that  was 
the  frontier  of  war.
‘Well,  I  can  remember  three  nights  there  for  certain,  and  I 
seem  to  remember  several  more,  but  I  would  take  my  oath  it 
was  never  a  whole  month.
But  for 
my  part  I  will  risk  no  hurt  to  this  thing:  of  all  the  works  of 
Sauron  the  only  fair.
Too  near  the  River,’  he  said,  shaking 
his  head.
‘Feel  ready  for  the  great  council?’ 

‘I  feel  ready  for  anything,’  answered  Frodo.
And  Aragorn  has  gone  with 
Elrond’s  sons.
And  first,  so 
that  all  may  understand  what  is  the  peril,  the  Tale  of  the  Ring 
shall  be  told  from  the  beginning  even  to  this  present.
In  the  distance  they 
glimpsed  yet  another  river  in  a  stony  valley  half-veiled  in 
mist.
The  four  hobbits  stepped  off  the  ferry.
The 
dark  trees  drew  aside,  and  ahead  they  could  see  the  path  going 
almost  straight  forward.
You  will  have  to  choose  between 
Bill  and  your  master.’ 

‘He’d  follow  Mr.
The 
Ring  was  trying  to  get  back  to  its  master.
Dusk  veiled  their 
feet,  and  mist  rose  in  the  hollows.
Frodo  stood  still,  hearing  far  off  great  seas  upon 
beaches  that  had  long  ago  been  washed  away,  and  sea-birds 
crying  whose  race  had  perished  from  the  earth.
Further  south  there  are  no  passes,  till  one  comes  to  the 
Gap  of  Rohan.
My  heart  tells  me  that  he  has  some  part  to  play  yet, 
for  good  or  ill,  before  the  end;  and  when  that  comes,  the  pity 
of  Bilbo  may  rule  the  fate  of  many  -  yours  not  least.
I  don’t  know  why.
‘A  matter  of  some  importance  -  to  us  both,’  answered 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY 


21 1 


Strider,  looking  Frodo  in  the  eye.
‘You  can  trot  off  and 
tell  Gandalf  that  he  has  gone  to  bed.
You  won’t  need  it  any  more,  Bilbo, 
unless  I  am  quite  mistaken.’ 

Bilbo  flushed,  and  there  was  an  angry  light  in  his  eyes.
He  stepped  down  and  vanished.
Suddenly  he  hopped  through  the  door  and  dis¬ 
appeared.
‘Excellent!’  said  Frodo,  when  he  understood  the  plan.
“But  do  not  put 
it  that  way,  if  you  meet  any  of  the  inhabitants.
Strider  will 
look  after  them.
He  was  already  far  away,  leaping  blindly  up  the  path  to  the 
hill-top.
The  narrow  path  now  wound  under  a  sheer 
wall  of  cliffs  to  the  left,  above  which  the  grim  flanks  of 
Caradhras  towered  up  invisible  in  the  gloom;  on  the  right 
was  a  gulf  of  darkness  where  the  land  fell  suddenly  into  a 
deep  ravine.
That’s  his  farm  away 
there  in  the  trees.’ 

‘One  trouble  after  another!’  said  Frodo,  looking  nearly  as 
much  alarmed  as  if  Pippin  had  declared  the  lane  was  the 
slot  leading  to  a  dragon’s  den.
He  knew  many  histories  and  legends  of  long  ago,  of 
Elves  and  Men  and  the  good  and  evil  deeds  of  the  Elder 
Days.
‘Not  that  hobbits  would  ever  acquire  quite  the 
Elvish  appetite  for  music  and  poetry  and  tales.
They  seemed 
hardly  to  have  closed  their  eyes  when  Glorfindel,  who  had 
set  himself  to  watch  while  they  slept,  awoke  them  again.
Strider  did  not 
reply  to  Sam,  but  turned  his  keen  eyes  on  Frodo.
‘You  can  trust  us  to  stick  to  you  through 
thick  and  thin  -  to  the  bitter  end.
There  were  toys  the  like  of  which  they 
had  never  seen  before,  all  beautiful  and  some  obviously  magi¬ 
cal.
Of 
the  tales  that  we  have  heard  this  day  the  tale  of  Frodo  was 
most  strange  to  me.
The  woods  in  the  valley  were  still  leafy  and 
full  of  colour,  and  seemed  peaceful  and  wholesome.
‘But  all  the  same,’  he  added  with  a 
shamefaced  laugh,  ‘I  am  terrified  of  him  and  his  dogs.
484  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

Some  were  brightly  painted,  and  shone  with  silver  and  gold 
and  green,  but  most  were  either  white  or  grey.
‘Has  he  gone?’  he  asked.
The  years  have  passed  like  swift 
draughts  of  the  sweet  mead  in  lofty  halls  beyond  the  West, 
beneath  the  blue  vaults  of  Varda  wherein  the  stars  tremble 
in  the  song  of  her  voice,  holy  and  queenly.
Sam,  who 
had  been  watching  his  master  with  great  concern,  shook  his 
head  and  muttered:  ‘Plain  as  a  pikestaff  it  is,  but  it’s  no  good 
Sam  Gamgee  putting  in  his  spoke  just  now.’ 

Presently  Frodo  got  up  and  walked  away;  and  Sam  saw 
that  while  the  others  restrained  themselves  and  did  not  stare 
at  him,  the  eyes  of  Boromir  followed  Frodo  intently,  until  he 
passed  out  of  sight  in  the  trees  at  the  foot  of  Amon  Hen.
What  a  horrible  place!
To  Frodo 


312  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

his  dangerous  flight,  and  the  rumours  of  the  darkness  growing 
in  the  world  outside,  already  seemed  only  the  memories  of  a 
troubled  dream;  but  the  faces  that  were  turned  to  meet  them 
as  they  entered  were  grave.
Are  they  idle?
But  I’ll  come  back,  perhaps,  one 
day  -  if  I  get  a  chance.’ 

‘You’ll  be  welcome  when  you  come,’  said  Maggot.
Also  Gildor 
advised  me  not  to  wait.
The  land  had  been  falling  steadily,  ever  since  they 
turned  aside  from  the  Road,  and  they  now  entered  a  wide  flat 
expanse  of  country,  much  more  difficult  to  manage .
The  sound  of  hoofs  drew 
nearer.
He  didn’t  ought  to  have;  and  if  he  has,  goodness 
knows  what  may  have  happened!’ 

‘But  he  wouldn’t  keep  it  on,’  said  Merry.
The  tidings  had  gone  far  and  wide  that  Gandalf 
was  missing  and  the  horsemen  had  been  seen.
‘I  am  not  warning  you 
against  leaving  an  address  at  the  post-office!
‘Still,’  he  said,  standing  suddenly  up  and  sticking  out  his 
chin,  while  his  beard  went  stiff  and  straight  like  bristling  wire, 
‘we  must  keep  up  our  courage.
Believe  rather  that  it  is  so  ordered  that  we,  who  sit  here, 
and  none  others,  must  now  find  counsel  for  the  peril  of  the 
world.
There  were  many  clear 
stars,  but  the  fast-waning  moon  would  not  be  seen  till  late.
‘Some  said  that  it  could  be  seen,  like  a  great  black  horse¬ 
man,  a  dark  shadow  under  the  moon.
Here  and  there  it  passed  over  other  rills, 
running  down  gullies  into  the  Withywindle  out  of  the  higher 
forest-lands,  and  at  these  points  there  were  tree-trunks  or 
bundles  of  brushwood  laid  carefully  across.
‘I  feared  it  was  so.’  Gimli 
cast  his  hood  over  his  face.
Yet  I  was 
afraid  of  him  at  first.
‘There  are  Elf-havens  west  of  my  land,  the  Shire, 
where  Hobbits  live.’ 

‘Happy  folk  are  Hobbits  to  dwell  near  the  shores  of  the 


454 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


sea!’  said  Haldir.
‘Wake  up,  hobbits!’  he  cried.
Then  he  remembered  where  he  was 
and  lay  down  again.
But  all  such  places  will  soon  become  islands 
under  siege,  if  things  go  on  as  they  are  going.
To 
the  South,  over  the  line  of  the  Withywindle,  there  was  a 
distant  glint  like  pale  glass  where  the  Brandywine  River  made 
a  great  loop  in  the  lowlands  and  flowed  away  out  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  hobbits.
Let  me  see  now!
They  heard 
of  the  Great  Barrows,  and  the  green  mounds,  and  the  stone- 
rings  upon  the  hills  and  in  the  hollows  among  the  hills.
‘Come!
Against  my  will  we  passed  under 
the  shades  of  Moria,  to  our  loss.
Presently 
he  sighed.
Immediately  afterwards  Haldir  came  climbing  swiftly  up 
through  the  branches.
They  felt  that  he  would  know  how  to  deal  with  Black  Riders, 
if  anyone  did.
Strange  as  News 
from  Bree  was  still  a  saying  in  the  Eastfarthing,  descending 
from  those  days,  when  news  from  North,  South,  and  East 
could  be  heard  in  the  inn,  and  when  the  Shire-hobbits 
used  to  go  more  often  to  hear  it.
Tall  and  sheer  and  ominous  they  stood  upon  either 
side  of  the  stream.
So  the  Company  went  on  their  long  way,  down  the  wide 
hurrying  waters,  borne  ever  southwards.
He  had 
no  will  left  in  the  matter.
Elrond  says  this  song  of  mine  is  to  be 
finished  before  the  end  of  the  evening,  and  I  am  stuck.
To 
the  tall  isle  I  will  go,  but  no  further.
You  had  better  go  back  west  to 
Hobbiton  -  but  you  can  go  by  road  this  time.” 

‘  “Baggins  has  left,”  he  answered  in  a  whisper.
I  did 
not  know  Bilbo,  of  course,  as  well  as  I  know  you;  I  was  too 
young,  and  he  was  also  more  careful  -  but  he  was  not  care¬ 
ful  enough.
It  was  cool,  as  if  the  sun  had  had 
no  power  to  warm  it;  but  at  that  time  this  seemed  pleasant.
Bilbo  put  out  his  hand.
Everywhere  the 
reeds  and  grasses  were  lush  and  tall,  in  places  far  above  their 
heads;  but  once  found,  the  path  was  easy  to  follow,  as  it 
turned  and  twisted,  picking  out  the  sounder  ground  among 
the  bogs  and  pools.
By  the  time  that  Tom  returned  they  were  feeling  strong 
(and  hungry).
Where 
there  are  so  many,  all  speech  becomes  a  debate  without  end.
It 
would  do  no  good  to  you  or  to  others,  if  you  tried  to  meddle 
with  it  again.”  Odd  sort  of  remark,  just  like  Gandalf.
But  we  must  do  something,  soon.
But  it 
would  not  stop  with  that,  alas!
I  will  go  first.’ 

He  went  in  cautiously,  and  the  others  filed  behind.
But 
even  as  they  were  hurrying  across  they  heard  far  away  two 
cries:  a  cold  voice  calling  and  a  cold  voice  answering.
At  other  times  there 
were  merely  lots  of  people  eating  and  drinking  -  continuously 
from  elevenses  until  six -thirty,  when  the  fireworks  started.
I  thought  you  were  away 
with  Mr.
‘In  Eregion  long  ago  many  Elven-rings  were  made,  magic 
rings  as  you  call  them,  and  they  were,  of  course,  of  various 
kinds:  some  more  potent  and  some  less.
Then 
he  knew  that  it  was  not  leaves,  but  the  sound  of  the  Sea 
far-off;  a  sound  he  had  never  heard  in  waking  life,  though  it 
had  often  troubled  his  dreams.
However,  there  is 
nothing  more  to  fear  from  them  at  present.
Beyond  the  river  the  land  appeared  flat 
and  empty,  formless  and  vague,  until  far  away  it  rose  again 
like  a  wall,  dark  and  drear.
He  took  off  his  party  clothes,  folded  up  and  wrapped 
in  tissue-paper  his  embroidered  silk  waistcoat,  and  put  it 
away.
Boromir  hauled  the  eastern  door  to,  grinding 
upon  its  hinges:  it  had  great  iron  rings  on  either  side,  but 
could  not  be  fastened.
fal  lal  the  willow!
Bilbo  was 
a  good  master.
And  whither  then?
On  three  sides  the  woods  pressed 
upon  it;  but  eastward  the  ground  fell  steeply  and  the  tops 
of  the  dark  trees,  growing  at  the  bottom  of  the  slope,  were 
below  their  feet.
It  was  wholly  dark.
But  even  as  he  swung  there  for  a  moment,  a 
voice  spoke  suddenly  from  the  tree-shadows  above  him.
‘Did  you  really  think  you  had  thrown  dust  in  all 
our  eyes?
334 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘At  the  end  of  June  I  was  in  the  Shire,  but  a  cloud  of  anxiety 
was  on  my  mind,  and  I  rode  to  the  southern  borders  of  the 
little  land;  for  I  had  a  foreboding  of  some  danger,  still  hidden 
from  me  but  drawing  near.
At  the  hill’s  foot  Frodo  found  Aragorn,  standing  still  and 
silent  as  a  tree;  but  in  his  hand  was  a  small  golden  bloom  of 
elanor,  and  a  light  was  in  his  eyes.
But  unless  you  have  more  skill  even  than  Saruman, 
who  has  studied  here  long,  you  will  find  naught  that  is  not 
well  known  to  me,  who  am  master  of  the  lore  of  this  City.” 

‘So  said  Denethor.
Everything  in  it  is  very  much  more  alive, 
more  aware  of  what  is  going  on,  so  to  speak,  than  things  are 
in  the  Shire.
Behind  loomed  up  the  Buck  Hill;  and  out  of  it,  through 
stray  shrouds  of  mist,  shone  many  round  windows,  yellow 
and  red.
‘If  I  move  I  shall  be  seen  and  hunted!
The  morning 
is  wearing  away.
Frodo  and  Sam  stood  as  if  enchanted.
Sam  did  his  best,  but  he  could  not  keep  up  with  Strider 
the  Ranger,  and  soon  fell  behind.
‘Awake,  little  master!’  he  said,  with  a  smile.
Farewell!
A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


243 


But  long  ago  he  rode  away, 
and  where  he  dwelleth  none  can  say; 
for  into  darkness  fell  his  star 
in  Mordor  where  the  shadows  are.
To 
Gandalf  the  far-off  memories  of  a  journey  long  before  were 
now  of  little  help,  but  even  in  the  gloom  and  despite  all 
windings  of  the  road  he  knew  whither  he  wished  to  go,  and 
he  did  not  falter,  as  long  as  there  was  a  path  that  led  towards 
his  goal.
But  there  you  are:  Hobbits  must  stick  together,  and 
especially  Bagginses.
The  landlord  hovered  round  for  a  little,  and  then  prepared 
to  leave  them.
‘I  thought  they  had  all 
vanished  long  ago.
And  we  fear  that  the  prisoner 
had  aid  from  others,  and  that  more  is  known  of  our  doings 
than  we  could  wish.
The  Bounders  have  never  been  so  busy  before.
As  they  did  so  the 
South  Wind  blew  upon  Cerin  Amroth  and  sighed  among  the 
branches.
After  that,  if 
Gandalf  wanted  him  urgently,  he  would  go  to  Crickhollow, 
and  might  even  get  there  first.
‘You  do 
make  me  feel  uncomfortable  and  lonesome,  Strider!’  he  said.
Bob  ought  to  learn  his  cat 
the  fiddle,  and  then  we’d  have  a  dance.’  They  called  for  more 
ale,  and  began  to  shout:  ‘Let’s  have  it  again,  master!
Mellyrn  they  are  called,  and  are 
those  that  bear  the  yellow  blossom,  but  I  have  never  climbed 


LOTHLORIEN 


445 


in  one.
Let  it  go!
At  last  Gandalf  looked  up.
And  he  has  been  well  rewarded, 
Frodo.
While  they  were  eating  Tom  went  up  to  the  mound,  and 
looked  through  the  treasures.
‘Where  am  I,  and  what  is  the  time?’  he  said  aloud  to  the 
ceiling.
It  was 
hard  to  say  of  what  colour  they  were:  grey  with  the  hue  of 
twilight  under  the  trees  they  seemed  to  be;  and  yet  if  they 
were  moved,  or  set  in  another  light,  they  were  green  as 
shadowed  leaves,  or  brown  as  fallow  fields  by  night,  dusk- 
silver  as  water  under  the  stars.
Tom  stooped,  removed  his  hat,  and  came  into  the  dark 
chamber,  singing: 

Get  out,  you  old  Wight!
‘Trapped!’  cried  Gandalf.
Men  once  dwelt  here,  ages  ago;  but  none  remain  now.
That  was  the  way  of  it,  I  fear.
‘Hail,  Frodo!’  he  cried.
The 
ground  grew  soft,  and  in  places  boggy;  springs  appeared  in 
the  banks,  and  soon  they  found  themselves  following  a  brook 
that  trickled  and  babbled  through  a  weedy  bed.
Here  we  all 
are,  and  here  is  the  Ring.
In  this  last  boat  most  of  the  goods 
and  packs  were  stowed.
There  seemed 
to  be  cries  in  the  woods  behind,  but  he  did  not  heed  them.
Fie  almost  welcomed  the  coming  of  night,  for 
then  the  world  seemed  less  pale  and  empty.
He  sought  her  ever,  wandering  far 

Where  leaves  of  years  were  thickly  strewn.
‘Yet  we  are 
hard  pressed,  and  the  Sword  of  Elendil  would  be  a  help 
beyond  our  hope  -  if  such  a  thing  could  indeed  return  out  of 
the  shadows  of  the  past.’  He  looked  again  at  Aragorn,  and 
doubt  was  in  his  eyes.
This  is  good  fortune  beyond  my  hope,’  said 
Pippin.
For  a  while  he  sat  with 
unseeing  eyes  as  if  walking  in  distant  memory  or  listening  to 
sounds  in  the  Night  far  away.
They  turned  a  sharp  bend  in  the  river,  and  there,  sailing 
proudly  down  the  stream  towards  them,  they  saw  a  swan  of 
great  size.
I  shall 
return  soon.’ 

Aragorn  sprang  swiftly  away  and  went  in  pursuit  of  Sam.
I  want  to  think!’ 

‘Good  heavens!’  said  Pippin.
Bilbo,  I  said  that  you  were 
going  to  find  trouble.
We  have  been  terribly  anxious, 
and  Sam  has  hardly  left  your  side,  day  or  night,  except  to 
run  messages.
Butterbur 
solemnly.
One  by  one  the  others  fell  asleep.
Not  far  beyond  them  the  stream  becomes  clear 
and  smooth  again,  though  it  runs  swiftly.
One  voice  was 
certainly  the  old  Gaffer’s;  the  other  was  strange,  and  some¬ 
how  unpleasant.
‘My  city  is  not  far  now;  and  it  is  little  further  from  there  to 
Mordor  than  from  here.
Frodo  was  sitting  at  a  table  with  a  lot  of  papers  in  front  of 
him.
Then  Bilbo  would  read  passages  from 
his  book  (which  still  seemed  very  incomplete),  or  scraps  of 
his  verses,  or  would  take  notes  of  Frodo’s  adventures.
‘Good-bye!’  said  Frodo, 
looking  at  the  dark  blank  windows.
Underhill  had  taken  as  much  ale  as  was  good 
for  him.
But  you  have 
been  chosen,  and  you  must  therefore  use  such  strength  and 
heart  and  wits  as  you  have.’ 

‘But  I  have  so  little  of  any  of  these  things!
O  Lorien!
‘If  we  climb  the  pass  that  is  called  the  Redhorn  Gate,  under 
the  far  side  of  Caradhras,  we  shall  come  down  by  the  Dimrill 
Stair  into  the  deep  vale  of  the  Dwarves.
Gimli  looked  up  and  shook  his  head.
‘Yes,  you  have  seen  a  thing  or  two  since  you  last  peeped 
out  of  a  looking-glass,’  he  said  to  his  reflection.
But  what  be  bones  that  lie  in  a  hole?
‘Tell  me,  if  my 
asking  does  not  seem  foolish,  who  is  Tom  Bombadil?’ 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  163 

‘He  is,’  said  Goldberry,  staying  her  swift  movements  and 
smiling.
‘Fie  is  often  called  that  here.
Sam  leaped  after 
him,  and  then  hearing  Frodo’s  cry  he  ran  back  again,  weeping 
and  cursing.
Frodo  felt  his  spirits  reviving:  the  re¬ 
minder  of  Bilbo’s  first  successful  adventure  was  heartening.
‘You  won’t  find  your  clothes  again,’  said  Tom,  bounding 
down  from  the  mound,  and  laughing  as  he  danced  round 
them  in  the  sunlight.
Then  deep  folds  in  the  ground  were  dis¬ 
covered  unexpectedly,  like  the  ruts  of  great  giant-wheels  or 
wide  moats  and  sunken  roads  long  disused  and  choked  with 
brambles.
Inside  in  the  hall  there  was  piled  a  large  assortment  of 
packages  and  parcels  and  small  articles  of  furniture.
“And  he  told 
me  to  say  that  if  you  feel  the  need,  he  will  help;  but  you  must 
seek  his  aid  at  once,  or  it  will  be  too  late.” 

‘And  that  message  brought  me  hope.
‘In  this  phial,’  she  said,  ‘is  caught  the  light  of  Earendil’s  star, 
set  amid  the  waters  of  my  fountain.
I  have 
been  in  the  country  of  Hollin  in  many  seasons.
But  do  not  give  up  hope, 
Sam!’ 

Night  was  cold  up  on  the  high  ridge.
Frodo  and  Sam  beat  first  upon  the  tree-trunk  where  Pippin 
had  lain.
Haldir  had  bidden  them  fare¬ 
well  and  gone  back  again  to  the  fences  of  the  North,  where 
great  watch  was  now  kept  since  the  tidings  of  Moria  that  the 
Company  had  brought.
Twice  they  made  the  journey,  before 
all  was  brought  safe  to  the  southern  landing.
Two  great  trolls  appeared;  they  bore  great  slabs  of 
stone,  and  flung  them  down  to  serve  as  gangways  over  the 
fire.
The  book  and  bundle  he  stuffed  into  the  top  of  a  heavy  bag 
that  was  standing  there,  already  nearly  full.
One  morning  the  hobbits  woke  to  find  the  large  field,  south 
of  Bilbo’s  front  door,  covered  with  ropes  and  poles  for  tents 
and  pavilions.
At  last  all  was  removed  and  laid  on  the  portage-way.
For 
this  scroll  concerns  the  Ring,  and  thus  wrote  Isildur  therein: 

The  Great  Ring  shall  go  now  to  be  an  heirloom  of  the 
North  Kingdom;  but  records  of  it  shall  be  left  in  Gondor, 
where  also  dwell  the  heirs  ofElendil,  lest  a  time  come  when 
the  memory  of  these  great  matters  shall  grow  dim.
The  dining-room  was  bare  except  for  a  table  and 
chairs,  but  the  food  was  good,  and  there  was  good  wine: 
Frodo’s  wine  had  not  been  included  in  the  sale  to  the 
Sackville-Bagginses.
Frodo  gave  a  cry  and  groped  for  the  tongs; 
but  Gandalf  held  him  back.
I  will  send  out  messages,  such  as  I  can 
contrive,  to  those  whom  I  know  in  the  wide  world;  but  so 
perilous  are  the  lands  now  become  that  some  may  well  mis¬ 
carry,  or  come  no  quicker  than  you  yourself.
‘On  which  side  will  you  journey?
In  the  dell  itself 
they  found  recent  traces  of  a  fire,  and  other  signs  of  a  hasty 
camp.
Indeed  there  is  a  power  in  Rivendell  to 
withstand  the  might  of  Mordor,  for  a  while:  and  elsewhere 
other  powers  still  dwell.
If  I  may  say  so,  I  added  a  few  touches  of  my  own:  you  may 
not  have  noticed,  but  some  of  the  waves  took  the  form  of 
great  white  horses  with  shining  white  riders;  and  there  were 
many  rolling  and  grinding  boulders.
They  found  themselves  in  a  small  and  cosy 
room.
Let  us  keep  on  as  we  are  going!
He  slew  the  great.
It  is  a  good  ending,  and 
none  the  worse  for  having  been  used  before.
It  really  depends  on 
two  things.
All  the  while  that  they  dwelt  there 
the  sun  shone  clear,  save  for  a  gentle  rain  that  fell  at  times, 
and  passed  away  leaving  all  things  fresh  and  clean.
All  the  company  drew 
away  from  Pippin  and  Sam,  who  found  themselves  left  alone 
in  a  corner,  and  eyed  darkly  and  doubtfully  from  a  distance.
‘What  is  the 
plan  for  today?’  asked  Pippin.
‘It  all  seemed 
so  dim,  somehow;  and  it  still  does.’ 

‘Yes,  it  would.
He  began  to  suspect  even  old  Butterbur’s  fat 
face  of  concealing  dark  designs.
If  we  do  not  return  in  that 
time,  you  will  know  that  evil  has  indeed  befallen  us.
I 
may  find  means  to  persuade  you.
On  the  ground  floor  as  they  usually 
prefer;  round  windows  and  all  as  they  like  it.
You  are  in  Rivendell,  and  you  need 
not  worry  about  anything  for  the  present.’ 

‘I  haven’t  any  courage  to  keep  up,’  said  Frodo,  ‘but  I  am 
not  worried  at  the  moment.
Merely  to  be  there  was  a  cure  for  weari¬ 
ness,  fear,  and  sadness.
‘It  was  a  call,  or  a 
signal  -  there  were  words  in  that  cry,  though  I  could  not 
catch  them.
She  held 
a  candle,  shielding  its  flame  from  the  draught  with  her  hand; 
and  the  light  flowed  through  it,  like  sunlight  through  a  white 
shell.
Please  remember  -  all  of  you  -  that  the  name  of 
Baggins  must  NOT  be  mentioned.
It  was  a  pale  morning:  in  the  East,  behind  long  clouds 
like  lines  of  soiled  wool  stained  red  at  the  edges,  lay  glimmer¬ 
ing  deeps  of  yellow.
I’ll  keep  watch.
That’s  another 
thing  that’s  bothering  him.
What  an  inquisitive 
lot  they  all  are!’  He  had  half  a  mind  to  go  and  ask  the  Gaffer 
who  the  inquirer  was;  but  he  thought  better  (or  worse)  of  it, 
and  turned  and  walked  quickly  back  to  Bag  End.
Frodo  woke  up  first, 
and  found  that  a  tree-root  had  made  a  hole  in  his  back,  and 
that  his  neck  was  stiff.
Slowly  he  drew  it  out.
There  is  the 
Bonfire  Glade  in  front  of  us  (or  I  hope  so),  but  the  path  to  it 
seems  to  have  moved  away!’ 

The  light  grew  clearer  as  they  went  forward.
Come,  Master  Peregrin!
‘I  mean:  when  we  do  get  there,  it  is  not  certain  what  we 
shall  find.
Y ou  need  counsel  in  your  hard  choice.
Travellers  scowl  at 
us,  and  countrymen  give  us  scornful  names.
It  is  the  ill  will  of  Caradhras.
Frodo  thought  of  Bilbo  and  his  long  friendship  with 
the  dwarf,  and  of  Balin’s  visit  to  the  Shire  long  ago.
‘Now,  friends,’  said  Haldir,  ‘you  have  entered  the  Naith  of 
Lorien,  or  the  Gore,  as  you  would  say,  for  it  is  the  land 
that  lies  like  a  spearhead  between  the  arms  of  Silverlode  and 
Anduin  the  Great.
I  shall  slip  in 
quietly.
‘But  we  must  be  going  at 
once,  I’m  afraid.
Stooping  like  a 
cloud,  he  lifted  a  burning  branch  and  strode  to  meet  the 
wolves.
‘The  snow  is  growing  less,’  he  said,  ‘and  the  wind 
is  quieter.’ 

Frodo  gazed  wearily  at  the  flakes  still  falling  out  of  the  dark 
to  be  revealed  white  for  a  moment  in  the  light  of  the  dying 
fire;  but  for  a  long  time  he  could  see  no  sign  of  their  slacken¬ 
ing.
Well,  what  did  you  think 
of  it  all?’ 

‘If  you  mean,  inventing  all  that  about  a  “present”,  well,  I 
thought  the  true  story  much  more  likely,  and  I  couldn’t  see 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY  53 

the  point  of  altering  it  at  all.
Sunlight  streamed  back  again  into  the  room.
‘A  poor  old 
half-starved  creature  it  is,’  said  Bob;  ‘but  he  won’t  part  with 
it  for  less  than  thrice  its  worth,  seeing  how  you’re  placed,  not 
if  I  knows  Bill  Ferny.’ 

‘Bill  Ferny?’  said  Frodo.
The  Company  behind  him  spoke  seldom,  and  then  only  in 
hurried  whispers.
Thin  strands  of  river-mist 
were  hanging  above  the  dikes,  and  crawling  over  the  fields.
Then 
he  sprang  up  and  went  and  wakened  Gandalf.
In  the  distance  could  be  dimly  seen  a  line  of  bare  cliffs, 
and  in  their  midst,  taller  than  the  rest,  one  great  grey  wall.
In  here  it  is  ever  dark;  but  outside  the  late  Moon  is  riding 
westward  and  the  middle -night  has  passed.’ 

‘Poor  old  Bill!’  said  Sam.
After  which,  I  may  say,  he  seemed  to  regard 
himself  as  on  parole,  and  dried  up.’ 

‘Sam!’  cried  Frodo,  feeling  that  amazement  could  go  no 
further,  and  quite  unable  to  decide  whether  he  felt  angry, 
amused,  relieved,  or  merely  foolish.
‘But  if  that  does  not  shatter  them,  and  I  am  allowed 
a  little  peace  from  foolish  questions,  I  will  seek  for  the  opening 
words.
Do  you  not  know,  Boromir,  or  do  you  choose 
to  forget  the  North  Stair,  and  the  high  seat  upon  Amon  Hen, 
that  were  made  in  the  days  of  the  great  kings?
I  haven’t  got  it!’  It 
was  some  time  before  anyone  could  make  out  what  he  was 
babbling  about.
And  he  was  in  any  case  the 
bearer  of  the  Ring:  it  hung  upon  its  chain  against  his  breast, 
and  at  whiles  it  seemed  a  heavy  weight.
Wielding  it  the  Free  Lords  of  the  Free 
may  surely  defeat  the  Enemy.
Yet  its  waters  were  dark:  a  deep  blue  like  clear 
evening  sky  seen  from  a  lamp-lit  room.
Down  on  the  Road,  where  it  swept  to  the  right  to  go  round 
the  foot  of  the  hill,  there  was  a  large  inn.
The  others  turned  in  amazement,  for  the  voice  was  Sam’s.
‘Now  then!’  said  the  farmer,  throwing  the  reins  to  Sam  and 
striding  forward.
‘This  is  Goldberry’s  washing  day,’  he  said,  ‘and  her 
autumn-cleaning.
They  talked  for  a  little,  for  Merry  still  had 
several  questions  to  ask.
It  is  my  own.
The  crack  by  which  he  had  laid  himself  had  closed 
together,  so  that  not  a  chink  could  be  seen.
He  felt  his  tongue  cleave  to  his  mouth, 
and  his  heart  labouring.
I  am  going  into  the 
Old  Forest  first  thing  tomorrow.’ 

‘Well,  that’s  that,’  said  Pippin.
He  is  a  strange 
creature,  but  maybe  I  should  have  summoned  him  to  our 
Council.’ 

‘He  would  not  have  come,’  said  Gandalf.
It 
was  clear  as  spring  water  and  had  no  taste,  and  it  did  not  feel 
either  cool  or  warm  in  the  mouth;  but  strength  and  vigour 
seemed  to  flow  into  all  their  limbs  as  they  drank  it.
They  stand  tall  in  our  dreams:  Baraz,  Zirak, 
Shathur.
And  it  would  be  well  for  all  to  know  what  passes 
there.
‘I  can’t  understand 
you.
Presently  Sam  appeared, 
trotting  quickly  and  breathing  hard;  his  heavy  pack  was 
hoisted  high  on  his  shoulders,  and  he  had  put  on  his  head  a 
tall  shapeless  felt  bag,  which  he  called  a  hat.
They  little 
thought  how  dangerous  that  part  might  prove.
Some 
speak  of  departing,  yet  for  that  it  already  seems  too  late.
He  was  climbing  the  steep 
bank.
‘And  then  you  stopped,  because  you 
said  that  such  matters  were  best  left  until  daylight.
‘They  did  not  expect  this,’  he  said.
You  see,  though  still  bound  by  desire  of  it,  the 
Ring  was  no  longer  devouring  him;  he  began  to  revive  a  little.
Leaf  and  branch,  water 
and  stone:  they  have  the  hue  and  beauty  of  all  these  things 
under  the  twilight  of  Lorien  that  we  love;  for  we  put  the 
thought  of  all  that  we  love  into  all  that  we  make.
The  audience  all  opened  their  mouths  wide  for 
laughter,  and  stopped  short  in  gaping  silence;  for  the  singer 


Elves  (and  Hobbits)  always  refer  to  the  Sun  as  She.
It  is  high  time  for  lunch.’  He  sat  down  on  the  bank 
at  the  side  of  the  road  and  looked  away  east  into  the  haze, 
beyond  which  lay  the  River,  and  the  end  of  the  Shire  in  which 
he  had  spent  all  his  life.
That  is  the  north  boundary  of  Rohan;  and  of  old  all 
that  lay  between  Limlight  and  the  White  Mountains  belonged 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


497 


to  the  Rohirrim.
‘The  Three,  fairest  of  all,  the  Elf-lords  hid  from  him,  and 
his  hand  never  touched  them  or  sullied  them.
In  one  hand  he  held  a  long  sword,  and  in  the  other  a  knife; 
both  the  knife  and  the  hand  that  held  it  glowed  with  a  pale 
light.
He  ran  to  Frodo  and  took  his  left  hand,  awkwardly 
and  shyly.
Inside,  written  in  the  wizard’s 
strong  but  graceful  script,  was  the  following  message: 


222 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


THE  PRANCING  PONY,  BREE.
At  noon  they 
halted,  and  Frodo  was  aware  that  they  had  passed  out  under 
the  shining  Sun.
Good  night!’ 

The  Company  now  took  their  leave  and  returned  to  their 
pavilion.
Who  now  shall 
refill  the  cup  for  me?
Tom  must  teach  the  right  road,  and  keep  your  feet  from 
wandering.’ 

Frodo  laughed  (trying  to  feel  pleased),  and  taking  off  the 
Ring  he  came  and  sat  down  again.
They  had  come  to  the 
Brown  Lands  that  lay,  vast  and  desolate,  between  Southern 
Mirkwood  and  the  hills  of  the  Emyn  Muil.
The  dark 
birds  passed  over  now  and  again;  but  as  the  westering  Sun 
grew  red  they  disappeared  southwards.
Other  wanderers  were  rare,  and  of  evil  sort: 
trolls  might  stray  down  at  times  out  of  the  northern  valleys 
of  the  Misty  Mountains.
But  we  did  not  realize  what  that  would  mean.
Then  something  came  into  the  chamber  -  I  felt  it  through 
the  door,  and  the  ores  themselves  were  afraid  and  fell  silent.
At  the  end  of  the  second  week  in  September  a 
cart  came  in  through  Bywater  from  the  direction  of  Brandy¬ 
wine  Bridge  in  broad  daylight.
I  am  thankful  that  they 
do!
It  was  loftier  and  far  longer  than  the  one  in  which  they  had 
slept.
In  the  dim  light  of  the  stars  their  stems 
were  grey,  and  their  quivering  leaves  a  hint  of  fallow  gold.
‘I  remember  that  he  said:  “May  you  have  joy  of 
the  sight!
His  footsteps 
retreated  down  the  passage.
There  at  the 
bottom  of  a  sharp  incline  they  saw  before  them  a  long  flat 
mile,  and  beyond  that  the  Ford  of  Rivendell.
They  would 
have  been  willing  to  follow  a  leader  over  the  River  and 
into  the  shadow  of  Mordor;  but  Frodo  spoke  no  word,  and 
Aragorn  was  still  divided  in  his  mind.
From  Evereven’s  lofty  hills 
where  softly  silver  fountains  fall 
his  wings  him  bore,  a  wandering  light, 
beyond  the  mighty  Mountain  Wall.
Stop  possessing  it.
he 
thrust  the  end  of  his  staff  into  the  midst  of  it.
They  rolled  the  Man  slowly  up  the  hill 
and  bundled  him  into  the  Moon, 

While  his  horses  galloped  up  in  rear, 

And  the  cow  came  capering  like  a  deer, 
and  a  dish  ran  up  with  the  spoon.
Nowhere  could  they  see  any  gleam  of  water  or  hear 
any  sound  of  it.
The  others  remained  long  by  the  river-side.
The  Lady  Galadriel  said  no  word  but 
looked  long  upon  his  face.
‘We  might  do  something  with  fire!’ 

We  might,’  said  Frodo  doubtfully.
Before  them 
and  on  either  side  stretched  a  huge  empty  hall;  its  black  walls, 
polished  and  smooth  as  glass,  flashed  and  glittered.
There 
was  still  no  sound  of  pursuit.
But  still  there  are  the  Three.
I  will 
go  on  and  explore.’ 

He  passed  out  into  the  sunshine  and  disappeared  into  the 
long  grasses.
374 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Then  let  us  weigh  the  matter  in  our  minds,  while  the 
others  rest  and  sleep,’  said  Aragorn.
The  upper  wind  settled  in  the  West  and  deeper  and  wetter 
clouds  rolled  up  to  spill  their  laden  rain  on  the  bare  heads  of 
the  Downs.
Bilbo.
On  a  time  they  took  a  boat 
and  went  down  to  the  Gladden  Fields,  where  there  were  great 
beds  of  iris  and  flowering  reeds.
Give  me  an  hour  longer,  and  I  will  speak.
For  you  I  have 
prepared  this.’  She  held  up  a  small  crystal  phial:  it  glittered 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


491 


as  she  moved  it,  and  rays  of  white  light  sprang  from  her  hand.
The  hobbits  sat  still  before  him,  enchanted;  and  it 
seemed  as  if,  under  the  spell  of  his  words,  the  wind  had 
gone,  and  the  clouds  had  dried  up,  and  the  day  had  been 
withdrawn,  and  darkness  had  come  from  East  and  West,  and 
all  the  sky  was  filled  with  the  light  of  white  stars.
Deep  night  had  fallen.
What  do  you  make  of  it,  Mr.
Where  did  you 
find  them,  Mr.
But  I  have  never  heard  of  anything  like  this  rider.
‘No,’  said  Frodo.
‘Why  not  get  rid  of  it?
I 
had  to  speak  a  word  of  Command.
Come  on!
The  danger  will  increase  with 
every  league  that  we  go  south  under  the  naked  sky.
Frodo!’ 

‘I  wouldn’t,’  said  Frodo.
‘There  is  only  one  way:  to  find  the  Cracks  of  Doom  in  the 
depths  of  Orodruin,  the  Fire-mountain,  and  cast  the  Ring  in 
there,  if  you  really  wish  to  destroy  it,  to  put  it  beyond  the 
grasp  of  the  Enemy  for  ever.’ 

‘I  do  really  wish  to  destroy  it!’  cried  Frodo.
‘Why  are  you  so  unfriendly?’  said  Boromir.
derry  del,  my  hearties!
‘I  can  walk.
But  if  hope  should  not  fail,  then  I 
say  to  you,  Gimli  son  of  Gloin,  that  your  hands  shall  flow 
with  gold,  and  yet  over  you  gold  shall  have  no  dominion.
Bilbo  as  taught  me  my  letters.
‘Fly!
‘Come,  friend  Frodo!’  said  Tom.
“It’s  a  dangerous  business, 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


97 


Frodo,  going  out  of  your  door,”  he  used  to  say.
Frodo  was  the  only  one  present  who  had  said  nothing.
And  they  needed  fuel;  for  Strider  said  that 
Frodo  must  be  kept  warm,  especially  at  night,  while  fire 
would  be  some  protection  for  them  all.
‘I  could  not  follow  him  then  and  there.
It  was  important.
Though,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  they  were  not  very  different  from  the  other  hobbits 
of  the  Four  Farthings.
I  cannot  say.
Even 
as  he  did  so,  a  dark  shape,  like  a  cloud  and  yet  not  a  cloud, 
for  it  moved  far  more  swiftly,  came  out  of  the  blackness  in 
the  South,  and  sped  towards  the  Company,  blotting  out  all 
light  as  it  approached.
‘Boats  of  the  Elves  would  not  sink,  maybe,’  he  said,  ‘but 
that  does  not  say  that  we  should  come  through  Sarn  Gebir 
alive.
It  was 
icy  cold;  and  they  spluttered  and  puffed  as  they  bathed  their 
faces  and  hands.
It  dived  into  dells,  and  hugged  steep  banks;  and 
where  it  passed  over  flatter  and  more  open  ground  on  either 
side  of  it  there  were  lines  of  large  boulders  and  hewn  stones 
that  screened  the  travellers  almost  like  a  hedge.
When  evening  in  the  Shire  was  grey 
his  footsteps  on  the  Hill  were  heard; 
before  the  dawn  he  went  away 
on  journey  long  without  a  word.
Now  we 
know  who  made  the  path  -  and  we  had  better  get  off  it  quick.’ 

‘There  is  no  need,  I  think,’  said  Strider,  coming  out.
He  had  a  pocket  full 
of  them:  a  parting  present  from  Nob  and  Bob.
They  were  carved  like  boles  of  mighty  trees  whose 
boughs  upheld  the  roof  with  a  branching  tracery  of  stone.
I 
shan’t  get  a  chance  again.
We  sing  to  thee 
In  a  far  land  beyond  the  Sea.
I  have  written  some  more  of  my  book.
But  I  am  not  going  by  road:  it  would  be  safer  to  wait 
here  than  that.
Then  he  halted,  listening.
Why  the  disguise?
He 
heard  Frodo’s  voice,  but  it  seemed  to  come  from  a  great 
distance,  or  from  under  the  earth,  crying  out  strange  words.
It  was  his  birthday-present,  and  so  on,  and  on.
‘It  may  not  matter  much,’  he  said  apologetically,  ‘but 
I  would  rather  not  be  seen  on  the  road  -  by  anyone.
They  could 
not  jump  over  it,  nor  indeed  get  across  it  at  all  without  getting 
wet,  scratched,  and  muddy.
A  great  king  and  sorcerer 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND  335 

he  was  of  old,  and  now  he  wields  a  deadly  fear.
I’ve  been  in  terror  of  you  and  your  dogs 
for  over  thirty  years,  Farmer  Maggot,  though  you  may  laugh 
to  hear  it.
It  cheated  first,  it  did.
Maggot, 
a  queen  among  farmers’  wives.
Little  fingers  of  fire 
licked  against  the  dry  scored  rind  of  the  ancient  tree  and 
scorched  it.
Pippin  and  I  always  intended  to  go  wherever  he  went,  and 
we  still  do.
Under  the  morning  sun  the  prospect  of 
seeing  a  whole  troop  of  them  did  not  seem  very  alarming  to 
him.
‘I  wonder  if  that  is  what  they 
meant:  that  the  lower  levels  are  on  fire?
‘And  shall  I  show  you  the  bedrooms,  while  your  supper  is 
got  ready?’ 

They  were  washed  and  in  the  middle  of  good  deep  mugs 
of  beer  when  Mr.
Whoa!
Is  this  the  coat  that  Gandalf  spoke  of?
That  was  Gandalf,  if  you  know  who  I  mean.
‘For  this  is  what  your 
folic  would  call  magic,  I  believe;  though  I  do  not  understand 
clearly  what  they  mean;  and  they  seem  to  use  the  same  word 
of  the  deceits  of  the  Enemy.
‘ It’s  the  job  that’s  never  started  as  takes  longest  to  finish ,  as 
my  old  gaffer  used  to  say.
Well,  the  news  of  the  great  events  went 
far  and  wide  in  Wilderland,  and  many  had  heard  Bilbo’s 
name  and  knew  where  he  came  from.
‘And  what  shall  we  do,  if  you  prove  right?’ 

‘Stop  him!
Of  these  things  Frodo  had  already  heard  many 
rumours;  but  the  tale  of  Gloin  was  new  to  him,  and  when  the 
dwarf  spoke  he  listened  attentively.
On  that  side,  running  in  more  than 
half  a  circle  from  the  hill  and  back  to  it,  there  was  a  deep  dike 
with  a  thick  hedge  on  the  inner  side.
All  that  he  saw  was  shapely,  but  the  shapes 
seemed  at  once  clear  cut,  as  if  they  had  been  first  conceived 
and  drawn  at  the  uncovering  of  his  eyes,  and  ancient  as  if 
they  had  endured  for  ever.
The  time  is  not  come 
yet.
‘Tonight  you  shall  sleep  in  peace.’  Then  they  sighed  and  felt 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL  465 

suddenly  weary,  as  those  who  have  been  questioned  long  and 
deeply,  though  no  words  had  been  spoken  openly.
‘Listen,  Hound  of  Sauron!’  he  cried.
He  is  an  Elf-lord  of 
a  house  of  princes.
The  second  disappearance  of  Mr.
“I  thought  I  had  fallen  into 
deep  water,”  he  says  to  me,  when  I  shook  him.
Elrond,  as  was  his  custom,  sat  in  a  great  chair  at  the  end  of 
the  long  table  upon  the  dais;  and  next  to  him  on  the  one  side 
sat  Glorfindel,  on  the  other  side  sat  Gandalf.
‘The 
choice  seems  near  now  between  fire  and  death,  Gandalf.
But  they 
would  do  well  to  start  early;  for  weather  in  that  country  was 
a  thing  that  even  Tom  could  not  be  sure  of  for  long,  and  it 
would  change  sometimes  quicker  than  he  could  change  his 
jacket.
‘I  knew 
that  danger  lay  ahead,  of  course;  but  I  did  not  expect  to  meet 
it  in  our  own  Shire.
They  did  not  start  early.
On  Frodo 
suddenly  the  shadow  of  parting  had  fallen:  he  knew  somehow 
that  the  time  was  very  near  when  he  must  leave  Lothlorien.
I  deem  it  to  be  a  tongue  of  the 
Black  Land,  since  it  is  fold  and  uncouth.
‘By  strange  paths  has  this  Company  been  led, 
and  so  far  to  evil  fortune.
It  is  not  a  very  broad  belt  -  I  should  have 
said  no  more  than  a  mile  at  the  widest  -  and  we  ought  to 
have  been  through  it  by  now.’ 

‘It  is  no  good  our  starting  to  go  in  zig-zags,’  said  Frodo.
The  next  day,  the  fourth,  was  little  better,  and  the  night 
almost  as  comfortless.
Of  folly  I  would  say,  if  the  long  wisdom 
of  Elrond  did  not  forbid  me.’ 

‘Despair,  or  folly?’  said  Gandalf.
Come  merry  dol!
Absurdly  simple,  like  most  riddles  when  you  see 
the  answer.’ 

Picking  up  his  staff  he  stood  before  the  rock  and  said  in  a 
clear  voice:  Mellon!
Beyond, 
there  seemed  to  be  no  more  hills.
Behind  them  the  mists  in  the  flat  fields  were  now  above 
the  hedges;  but  the  water  before  them  was  dark,  with  only  a 
few  curling  wisps  like  steam  among  the  reeds  by  the  hank.
‘Maybe  it  was  only  a  test,  and  she  thought  to  read  our 
thoughts  for  her  own  good  purpose;  but  almost  I  should 
have  said  that  she  was  tempting  us,  and  offering  what  she 
pretended  to  have  the  power  to  give.
He  seemed  to  hear  the  echo  of  words 
in  his  ears:  ‘Fear  nothing!
Suddenly  he  heard  the  sound  of  many  voices 
all  around  him.
But  tell  me:  what  do  you  mean 
by  they ?’ 

‘The  messengers  who  are  sent  with  the  Ring.’ 

‘Exactly!
It  was  burned  and  broken,  and  nothing  remains  of  it  now  but 
a  tumbled  ring,  like  a  rough  crown  on  the  old  hill’s  head.
His  friends  watched  over  him,  warming 
him,  and  bathing  his  wound.
At  that  moment  the  rider  sat  up,  and  shook 
the  reins.
‘Gandalf  the  Grey  fell  into  shadow.
‘And  who  built  these 
towers?
Butterbur  looked  troubled.
‘I  ask  leave  once  again  to  be 
your  companion,  Frodo.’ 

‘I  would  have  begged  you  to  come,’  said  Frodo,  ‘only  I 
thought  you  were  going  to  Minas  Tirith  with  Boromir.’ 

‘I  am,’  said  Aragorn.
‘This  at  least  is 
plain:  the  evil  of  the  Ring  is  already  at  work  even  in  the 
Company,  and  the  Ring  must  leave  them  before  it  does  more 
harm.
‘You  can’t  be  thinking  of  doing  that.
Then  setting  it  aside,  he  turned  to  Frodo  and  in  a 
soft  tone  spoke  words  the  others  could  not  catch.
‘I  am 
afraid  this  has  been  too  much  for  Frodo.
‘What  in  the  Shire  is  that?’  exclaimed  Merry.
‘They’re  Elves,’  said  Sam.
Here  under  the 
shadow  of  the  hills  there  had  been  some  rain.
As  for 
moving  as  soon  as  it  is  dark,  I  am  afraid  that  you  are  right.’ 

‘Luckily  our  fire  made  little  smoke,  and  had  burned  low 
before  the  crebain  came,’  said  Aragorn.
I  cannot  say.
I  did  not  want  to  leave  you  any,  but 
Sam  insisted.’ 

Frodo  sat  down  beside  Sam  and  began  to  eat.
‘Eh,  what?’  said  Tom  sitting  up,  and  his  eyes  glinting  in 
the  gloom.
I  said.
Barliman  is  my  name.
There  is  no  water  and  no  shelter.
All  that  day  the  Company  marched  on,  until  they  felt  the 
cool  evening  come  and  heard  the  early  night-wind  whispering 
among  many  leaves.
‘Wouldn’t 
an  Ore  have  suited  it  better?’ 

‘It  is  no  laughing  matter,’  said  Gandalf.
For  a  moment  the 
wizard  stood  looking  at  the  fire;  then  he  stooped  and  removed 
the  ring  to  the  hearth  with  the  tongs,  and  at  once  picked  it 
up.
But  Mr.
Butterbur  did  not  seem  much  put  out.
‘I  came  without 
any,  and  I’ve  been  worried  ever  since.
Gandalf  was  shorter  in  stature  than  the  other  two;  but  his 
long  white  hair,  his  sweeping  silver  beard,  and  his  broad 
shoulders,  made  him  look  like  some  wise  king  of  ancient 
legend.
A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


37 


There  were  many  Bagginses  and  Boffins,  and  also  many 
Tooks  and  Brandybucks;  there  were  various  Grubbs  (re¬ 
lations  of  Bilbo  Baggins’  grandmother),  and  various  Chubbs 
(connexions  of  his  Took  grandfather);  and  a  selection  of 
Burrowses,  Bolgers,  Bracegirdles,  Brockhouses,  Goodbodies, 
Hornblowers  and  Proudfoots.
About  them  the 
turf  was  burned  to  the  roots  and  all  within  the  ring  the  grass 
was  scorched  and  shrivelled,  as  if  flames  had  swept  the  hill¬ 
top;  but  there  was  no  sign  of  any  living  thing.
He  had 
not  done  any  strenuous  walking  for  a  long  time,  and  the 
reflection  looked  rather  flabby,  he  thought.
The  three  of  us 
could  not  challenge  a  hundred,  so  we  went  ahead  and  spoke 
with  feigned  voices,  leading  them  on  into  the  wood.
‘Let 
us  hope  that  the  fire  now  lies  between  us  and  pursuit.
And  Saruman?
We  will  not  speak  of  this  here,’  he  said.
Strider  seemed  to  be  getting  anxi¬ 
ous:  they  were  nearly  ten  days  out  from  Weathertop,  and 
their  stock  of  provisions  was  beginning  to  run  low.
Our  hardest  task 
will  be  to  get  our  boats  and  baggage  to  the  old  portage-way.
Lend  me  the  Ring!’ 

‘No!
Frodo  looked  up  at  the  Elf  standing  tall  above  him,  as  he 
gazed  into  the  night,  seeking  a  mark  to  shoot  at.
In  which  case  you  also  were  meant  to  have  it.
‘I  could 
not  make  out  what  they  were  about.
‘Hear!
I  came  also 
upon  two  others,  but  they  turned  away  southward.
We  must  get  clear  of  the  Forest 
first.’  But  the  others  were  too  far  gone  to  care.
‘He  shall  be  found,’  he  said.
Four  Riders  did  indeed 
follow  me,  but  they  turned  back  after  a  while  and  made  for 
the  Ford,  it  seems.
‘And  it  would  seem  like  wisdom  but 
for  the  warning  of  my  heart.’ 

Warning?
The  burden 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  517 

is  heavy.
Never  again  shall  there  be  any 
such  league  of  Elves  and  Men;  for  Men  multiply  and  the 
Firstborn  decrease,  and  the  two  kindreds  are  estranged.
Words  began  to  be  whispered  in  secret:  it  was 
said  that  we  were  hemmed  in  a  narrow  place,  and  that  greater 
wealth  and  splendour  would  be  found  in  a  wider  world.
‘Fair  lady!’  said  Frodo  again  after  a  while.
‘I  do  not  like  this  news,’ 
he  said  at  last.
I 
hardly  expected  to  get  such  an  answer,  not  even  from  you.
But  so  it  is,  Sam: 
in  that  land  you  lost  your  count.
A  black  shadow  seemed  to  pass  like  an  arm  above  him;  it 
missed  Amon  Hen  and  groped  out  west,  and  faded.
Now  withered  lay  the  hemlock-sheaves, 

And  one  by  one  with  sighing  sound 
Whispering  fell  the  beechen  leaves 
In  the  wintry  woodland  wavering.
Then  he 
sat  in  the  largest  chair  and  called  the  hobbits  to  gather  round 
him.
Edro,  edro!
I’ll  say  you’re  dead, 
or  have  left  the  Shire,  or  anything  you  like.
198  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

‘We  are  making  for  the  inn  here,’  answered  Frodo.
In  spite  of  the  fading  of  his 
sword  the  feeling  of  immediate  danger  did  not  leave  Frodo, 
rather  it  grew  stronger.
Tomorrow  early  you  must  go  on.
The  knock  was  repeated,  much 
louder,  but  he  took  no  notice.
‘Tell  us  of  Gil-galad,’  said  Merry  suddenly,  when  he 
paused  at  the  end  of  a  story  of  the  Elf-kingdoms.
The  wildest  imaginings  that 
dark  rumour  had  ever  suggested  to  the  hobbits  fell  altogether 
short  of  the  actual  dread  and  wonder  of  Moria.
Why  was  he  hesitating?
Peregrin,’  he  said,  ‘where  might  you  be  coming 
from,  and  where  might  you  be  going  to?
Certainly  it 
reminds  me  very  much  of  Bilbo  in  the  last  years,  before  he 
went  away.
Yes,  they  passed,  and  they  seemed  not  to  touch  him.
The  only  thing  to  do  is  to  go  off  in 
a  quite  unexpected  direction.’ 

‘But  that  can  only  mean  going  into  the  Old  Forest!’  said 
Fredegar  horrified.
‘ Elves  and  Dragons!
From 
there  the  power  was  spreading  far  and  wide,  and  away  far 
east  and  south  there  were  wars  and  growing  fear.
Since  you  have  guessed  so  much,  please  help  me 
and  do  not  hinder  me!’ 

‘You  do  not  understand!’  said  Pippin.
Near  him  sat  the  Lady  Arwen.
But  you  cannot  trust  us  to  let  you  face  trouble  alone,  and  go 
off  without  a  word.
Not  far  away  they 
found  a  spring  of  clear  water  in  the  hillside,  and  near  it 
footprints  not  more  than  a  day  or  two  old.
A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


251 


Enchantment  healed  his  weary  feet 
That  over  hills  were  doomed  to  roam; 
And  forth  he  hastened,  strong  and  fleet, 

And  grasped  at  moonbeams  glistening.
Glamdring  shone  with  a 
pale  light,  and  Sting  glinted  at  the  edges.
Why  should  we  not  think  that 
the  Great  Ring  has  come  into  our  hands  to  serve  us  in  the 
very  hour  of  need?
It 
spouted  green  and  scarlet  flames.
Picking  up  a  faggot  he  held  it  aloft  for  a  moment,  and 
then  with  a  word  of  command,  naur  an  edraith  ammen!
It  cracked 
and  staggered  back,  and  the  opening  grew  suddenly  wide.
I  think  well  of  you  -  and  of  the  others.
But  the  land  became  steadily  more  tame  and 
well-ordered.
What  became  of  him?
They 
are  terrible!’ 

The  hobbits  looked  at  him,  and  saw  with  surprise  that  his 
face  was  drawn  as  if  with  pain,  and  his  hands  clenched  the 
arms  of  his  chair.
‘I  thought  I  had  been  both 
careful  and  clever.
There  were  rumours  of  strange  things  happening  in  the 
world  outside;  and  as  Gandalf  had  not  at  that  time  appeared  or 
sent  any  message  for  several  years,  Frodo  gathered  all  the  news 
he  could.
But  in  the 
wild  lands  beyond  Bree  there  were  mysterious  wanderers.
If  he  don’t  come,  ring  and 
shout!’ 

Off  he  went  at  last,  and  left  them  feeling  rather  breathless.
Awe  and  fear  fell  upon  Frodo,  and  he  cowered 
down,  shutting  his  eyes  and  not  daring  to  look  up  as  the  boat 
drew  near.
And  the  Eagles  of  the  Mountains  went  far  and  wide,  and  they 
saw  many  things:  the  gathering  of  wolves  and  the  mustering 
of  Ores;  and  the  Nine  Riders  going  hither  and  thither  in  the 
lands;  and  they  heard  news  of  the  escape  of  Gollum.
It  isn’t  to  see  Elves  now,  nor 
dragons,  nor  mountains,  that  I  want  -  I  don’t  rightly  know 
what  I  want:  but  I  have  something  to  do  before  the  end,  and 
it  lies  ahead,  not  in  the  Shire.
‘We  have  now  come  to  the  River  Hoarwell,  that 
the  Elves  call  Mitheithel.
Indeed,  for  Three  Purposes!
About  it  lay  a  smooth  sward,  shelving  down  on  all 
sides  to  its  bare  unbroken  rim.
At  last  they  came  to  a  narrow  gate  in  a  thick  hedge.
‘I  will  give  you  the  One  Ring,  if  you  ask  for  it.
We  can  have  many  a 
good  talk.
Fear  seemed  to  stretch  out 
a  vast  hand,  like  a  dark  cloud  rising  in  the  East  and  looming 
up  to  engulf  him.
The  land  before  them  began  steadily  to  rise  again.
This  is  a  foe  beyond  any  of  you.
Gollum  had  good  friends  now,  good  friends 
and  very  strong.
The  wind  whistled  in  his  ears,  and  the 
bells  upon  the  harness  rang  wild  and  shrill.
I  don’t 
often  get  asked  for  a  second  hearing.
There  need  not  be,  there  would  not  be,  any  real  change  in 
our  designs,  only  in  our  means.” 

‘  “Saruman,”  I  said,  “I  have  heard  speeches  of  this  kind 
before,  but  only  in  the  mouths  of  emissaries  sent  from 
Mordor  to  deceive  the  ignorant.
Nob,  he  came 
and  told  me  that  two  black  men  were  at  the  door  asking  for 
a  hobbit  called  Baggins.
All  choices  seem  ill,  and 
to  be  caught  between  wolves  and  the  wall  the  likeliest  chance.
A  shuddering  howl  broke  from 
him,  as  if  he  were  a  captain  summoning  his  pack  to  the 
assault.
‘Yes,’  answered  Gandalf,  ‘he  has  gone  at  last.’ 

‘I  wish  - 1  mean,  I  hoped  until  this  evening  that  it  was  only 
a  joke,’  said  Frodo.
Now  let  us  go!’ 

He  strode  forward  and  set  his  foot  on  the  lowest  step.
They  were  on  an  island  in  a  sea  of  trees,  and  the 
horizon  was  veiled.
Before  he  could  pick  it  up,  the  wizard  stooped  and 
seized  it  and  set  it  in  its  place.
I’m  tired  o’  gnawing  old  bones  and  skins; 

I’ve  a  mind  to  dine  on  thee  now.
As  they 
approached  he  took  it  out  of  his  mouth  and  spat.
Strider,  too:  his  heart  yearns  for  Minas  Tirith,  and 
he  will  be  needed  there,  now  Boromir  has  fallen  into  evil.
‘So  that  is  what 
became  of  the  Ring!’  he  cried.
Many  coiling  arms 
seized  the  doors  on  either  side,  and  with  horrible  strength, 
swung  them  round.
Merry  and  Pippin  in  the  middle  boat  were  ill  at  ease,  for 
Boromir  sat  muttering  to  himself,  sometimes  biting  his  nails, 
as  if  some  restlessness  or  doubt  consumed  him,  sometimes 
seizing  a  paddle  and  driving  the  boat  close  behind  Aragorn’s.
They  were  looking  across  the 
Woody  End  towards  the  Brandywine  River.
But  always  their  thoughts  and  words  strayed 
back  to  Frodo  and  the  Ring.
‘But  don’t  forget  the  sniffing!’ 

The  hoofs  drew  nearer.
As  Frodo  drew  near  he  threw  back  his  hood, 
showing  a  shaggy  head  of  dark  hair  flecked  with  grey,  and  in 
a  pale  stern  face  a  pair  of  keen  grey  eyes.
He  was  already  giving  an  imitation 
of  the  Speech,  and  was  drawing  near  to  the  astonishing 
Disappearance.
It  would  comfort  me.
There  were  now  no  openings  to 
other  galleries  or  tunnels  on  either  side,  and  the  floor  was 
level  and  sound,  without  pits  or  cracks.
He  did  not  obey  at  once,  for  a  strange  reluctance  seized 
him.
And 
already,  Frodo,  our  time  is  beginning  to  look  black.
Secondly,  to  celebrate  my  birthday.
He  could  not  get  rid  of  it.
We  have  come  almost  in  the  opposite  direction 
to  which  we  intended.
‘The  world 
is  indeed  full  of  peril,  and  in  it  there  are  many  dark  places; 
but  still  there  is  much  that  is  fair,  and  though  in  all  lands  love 
is  now  mingled  with  grief,  it  grows  perhaps  the  greater.
In  the  morning  they  found,  for  the  first  time  since  they  had 
left  the  Chetwood,  a  track  plain  to  see.
What  is  the  meaning  of  it?’ 

‘The  meaning  of  it,  fair  people,’  said  Frodo,  ‘is  simply  that 
we  seem  to  be  going  the  same  way  as  you  are.
‘Alas!’  he  cried.
Up  from  the 
dark  plain  below  came  the  crying  of  fell  voices,  and  the  howl¬ 
ing  of  many  wolves.
Merry  was 
trapped:  another  crack  had  closed  about  his  waist;  his  legs 
lay  outside,  but  the  rest  of  him  was  inside  a  dark  opening, 
the  edges  of  which  gripped  like  a  pair  of  pincers.
They  say  only:  The  Doors  of 
Durin,  Lord  ofMoria.
Snow  may 
come.
Brief  and  small  but  very  vivid  he 
caught  a  glimpse  of  Bilbo  walking  restlessly  about  his  room.
Most  of  the  inhabitants  of  Bree  and  Staddle,  and  many 
even  from  Combe  and  Archet,  were  crowded  in  the  road  to 
see  the  travellers  start.
‘Here’s  my  Goldberry  clothed  all  in  silver-green  with  flowers 
in  her  girdle!
For 
the  Sword  that  was  Broken  is  the  Sword  of  Elendil  that  broke 
beneath  him  when  he  fell.
‘It  is 
certainly  a  troll-hole,  but  it  seems  to  have  been  long  forsaken.
But  this  business 
of  ours  will  be  his  greatest  task.’ 

Pippin  yawned.
Or  should  I  say  your  finger?’ 

‘I  don’t  know  what  you  mean,’  said  Frodo,  annoyed  and 
alarmed.
Caught  between 
fire  and  water,  and  seeing  an  Elf-lord  revealed  in  his  wrath, 
they  were  dismayed,  and  their  horses  were  stricken  with  mad¬ 
ness.
‘It’s  warm!’  said  Sam.
Hear!
‘But  what  I  have  heard  seems  to  me  for  the  most 
part  old  wives’  tales,  such  as  we  tell  to  our  children.
War  is  preparing!’ 

‘Then  you  knew  of  the  Riders  already  -  before  I  met  them?’ 

‘Yes,  I  knew  of  them.
Frodo!
‘Bill  Ferny  will  have  watched  where  we  left  the  Road,  for 
certain,’  he  said;  ‘though  I  don’t  think  he  will  follow  us  him¬ 
self.
I  am 
sick  of  my  doings  being  noticed  and  discussed.
At  the  far  southern  end  rose  three  peaks.
They  remained  some  days  in  Lothlorien,  so  far  as  they 
could  tell  or  remember.
they  said  to  me.
For  an  instant  the  door  left  my  control  and  began  to  open!
I  need  a  change,  or  something.’ 

Gandalf  looked  curiously  and  closely  at  him.
Merry  then  pushed  slowly  off  with  a  long 
pole.
But  for 
them  it  holds  an  even  deadlier  peril.
Suddenly  he  was  aware  of  himself  again,  Frodo, 
neither  the  Voice  nor  the  Eye:  free  to  choose,  and  with  one 
remaining  instant  in  which  to  do  so.
Frodo  lay  half  in  a  dream,  imagining 
that  endless  dark  wings  were  sweeping  by  above  him,  and 
that  on  the  wings  rode  pursuers  that  sought  him  in  all  the 
hollows  of  the  hills.
The  pony  looked  at  him  mournfully.
Gimli  aided  Gandalf  very  little,  except  by  his  stout  courage.
Yet  not  no  hope.
Don’t  you 
think  you  had  better  finish  now?
Tinuviel  was  dancing  there 
To  music  of  a  pipe  unseen, 

And  light  of  stars  was  in  her  hair, 

And  in  her  raiment  glimmering.
I  sent  him  back  to  his  master;  but  a  great  friendship 
has  grown  between  us,  and  if  I  have  need  he  will  come  at  my 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


345 


call.
At 
length  Gimli  broke  the  silence.
‘No  rope!
You  began  to  talk  to  me  like  the  Bree-folk,  but  your 
voice  has  changed.
We  have  reached  the 
borders  of  the  country  that  Men  call  Flollin;  many  Elves  lived 
here  in  happier  days,  when  Eregion  was  its  name.
And  there  were  murmured  hints  of  creatures  more 
terrible  than  all  these,  but  they  had  no  name.
‘Your  small  fire,  of  course,  would  not  melt  even  ordinary 
gold.
They 
felt  their  way  along  the  water’s  edge  for  some  distance,  until 
they  found  a  small  shallow  bay.
But  I  do  not  seek  allies  in  war.
He  took  the  Ring  off  his 
finger.
It  looked  to 
Frodo  like  the  remains  of  an  ancient  road,  that  had  once  been 
broad  and  well  planned,  from  Hollin  to  the  mountain-pass.
He  seemed  to  remember 
something  sad  about  it,  and  would  not  say  much.
The  morning  was  still  young  and  cold  when  the  Company 
set  out  again,  guided  now  by  Haldir  and  his  brother  Rumil.
And  that  has  proved  ill;  for  plainly  some  news  reached 
him,  and  I  was  not  at  hand  to  help.
A  deadly  sword,  a  healing  hand, 
a  back  that  bent  beneath  its  load; 
a  trumpet-voice,  a  burning  brand, 
a  weary  pilgrim  on  the  road.
As  he  stared  out  into  the  gloom,  a  black  shadow  moved  under 
the  trees;  the  gate  seemed  to  open  of  its  own  accord  and  close 
again  without  a  sound.
‘If 
you  mean  the  old  bogey-stories  Fatty’s  nurses  used  to  tell 
him,  about  goblins  and  wolves  and  things  of  that  sort,  I 
should  say  no.
Something  was  now  climbing  slowly,  and  its  breath  came 
like  a  soft  hissing  through  closed  teeth.
‘A  merry  troop  of  fools  we  shall 
look!
He  lifted  the  lid  and  fumbled  inside.
I  am  sorry;  for  the  trees  were  beautiful,  and  had 
stood  so  long.’ 

‘I  felt  that  something  horrible  was  near  from  the  moment 
that  my  foot  first  touched  the  water,’  said  Frodo.
They  stopped 
and  gazed  upward  unwinking.
Frodo  led 
the  way,  and  plunged  quickly  into  the  thick  bushes  beside  the 
stream.
‘Some  here  will  remember  that  many  years  ago  I  myself 
dared  to  pass  the  doors  of  the  Necromancer  in  Dol  Guldur, 
and  secretly  explored  his  ways,  and  found  thus  that  our  fears 
were  true:  he  was  none  other  than  Sauron,  our  Enemy  of 
old,  at  length  taking  shape  and  power  again.
As  soon  as  the  Shire -hobbits  entered,  there  was  a  chorus 
of  welcome  from  the  Bree-landers.
‘Yet  this  is  our  law.
The  passage 
they  had  chosen  wound  steadily  upwards.
In  this  matter  Elrond  will  have 
much  to  say,  and  your  friend  the  Strider.
The  Men 
of  Bree  seemed  all  to  have  rather  botanical  (and  to  the  Shire- 
folk  rather  odd)  names,  like  Rushlight,  Goatleaf,  Heather- 
toes,  Appledore,  Thistlewool  and  Ferny  (not  to  mention 
Butterbur).
Not  without  Sam?
‘Not  very  good  perhaps,  but  to  the  point  -  if  you  need  more 
beyond  the  word  of  Elrond.
It  is  a  frightful  nuisance.
If  I  think  it  necessary  after 
all  for  you  to  get  off  at  once,  I  shall  come  back  immediately, 
or  at  least  send  word.
I 
bid  the  black  fellows  be  off,  and  slammed  the  door  on  them; 
but  they’ve  been  asking  the  same  question  all  the  way  to 
Archet,  I  hear.
Quickly  he  stepped  back.
Over  this  the  Road 
crossed  by  a  causeway;  but  where  it  pierced  the  hedge  it  was 
barred  by  a  great  gate.
Come  never  here  again!
I  don’t 
like  my  thoughts;  but  thinking  of  one  thing  and  another,  and 
Mr.
There  time  flowed  swiftly 
by  us,  as  for  the  Elves.
‘No,  it  does 
not  seem  right,’  he  said  thoughtfully.
By  mid-day,  when  even  the  best- 
fed  were  out  and  about  again,  there  was  a  large  crowd  at  Bag 
End,  uninvited  but  not  unexpected.
Sleepiness  seemed  to  be  creeping  out  of  the  ground  and  up 
their  legs,  and  falling  softly  out  of  the  air  upon  their  heads 
and  eyes.
‘I  have  never  heard  of  him 
before.’ 

‘Maybe  not,’  answered  Gandalf.
But  why  should  you  believe  my  story,  if  you 
do  not  trust  me  already?
Eastward  the  Barrow-downs  rose, 
ridge  behind  ridge  into  the  morning,  and  vanished  out  of 
eyesight  into  a  guess:  it  was  no  more  than  a  guess  of  blue  and 
a  remote  white  glimmer  blending  with  the  hem  of  the  sky, 
but  it  spoke  to  them,  out  of  memory  and  old  tales,  of  the 
high  and  distant  mountains.
They  watch 
you.
Yet  I  think, 
Frodo,  that  you  have  courage  and  wisdom  enough  for  the 
venture,  or  I  would  not  have  brought  you  here.
He  is 
one  of  the  wandering  folk  -  Rangers  we  call  them.
Frodo  fidgeted,  wondering  what  to  do.
Still  I  watched 
and  I  waited.
Yes,  sold 
out  and  gone,  I  tell’ee.
Just  give  me  news  of  my  friends, 
and  tell  me  the  end  of  the  affair  at  the  Ford,  as  I  keep  on 
asking,  and  I  shall  be  content  for  the  present.
I  don’t  know  what  Gandalf  would  say.
‘No,  sir.
We  must  go  warily  tomorrow.’ 

The  day  came  like  fire  and  smoke.
You  will  soon  be 
sound  again.
He  started  to  struggle  up  the  ridge 
towards  the  tower:  but  suddenly  a  light  came  in  the  sky,  and 
there  was  a  noise  of  thunder.
He  thought  he 
was  misunderstood  and  ill-used.
I  was  at  the  Battle  of  Dagorlad  before  the  Black  Gate  of 
Mordor,  where  we  had  the  mastery:  for  the  Spear  of  Gil-galad 
and  the  Sword  of  Elendil,  Aeglos  and  Narsil,  none  could 
withstand.
‘You  may  have  a  chance  later,’  said  Gandalf.
There  were  three  official  meals: 
lunch,  tea,  and  dinner  (or  supper) .
But  the  Lords  of 
Minas  Tirith  still  fight  on,  defying  our  enemies,  keeping  the 
passage  of  the  River  from  Argonath  to  the  Sea.
But  the 
end  is  near,  for  good  or  ill.
‘But  I  am  not 
the  leader  of  the  Company.’  The  others  said  nothing,  and 
Aragorn  looked  doubtful  and  troubled.
I  cannot  keep 
the  Ring  and  stay  here.
My  friend  returned  out  of  great 
perils  bringing  the  miserable  creature  with  him.
How  would  you  do  that?
We  cannot  count  on  getting 
anything  to  eat  between  here  and  Rivendell,  except  what  we 
take  with  us;  and  we  ought  to  take  plenty  to  spare;  for  we 
may  be  delayed,  or  forced  to  go  round-about,  far  out  of  the 
direct  way.
But  the 
Forest  is  queer.
There  I  will  do  what  I  can  for  you.
‘It  seems  that  we 
shall  need  him  still,  if  the  wolves  do  not  find  us.
It  is  precious  to  me,  though  I  buy  it 
with  great  pain.
Isildur’s  Bane  is  found.
There  live  still  those  of  whom 
Luthien  was  the  foremother,  and  it  is  said  that  her  line  shall 
never  fail.
‘I  brought  a  little  hatchet  for  chopping  firewood,’  said 
Frodo.
The  hobbits  listened  with  delight;  and  Frodo  was  glad 
in  his  heart,  and  blessed  the  kindly  weather,  because  it 
delayed  them  from  departing.
Drink  water!
There  they  lay  flat.
So  he’s  got  to  get  back  to  the  boats.
At  first  they  talked,  or  hummed  a  tune  softly 
together,  being  now  far  away  from  inquisitive  ears.
In  that  room  there  are  three  tubs,  and  a  copper  full  of  boiling 
water.
‘Given  to  me  by  Mrs.
Yet  the  way  of  the  Ring  to  my  heart  is  by  pity,  pity 
for  weakness  and  the  desire  of  strength  to  do  good.
He  woke 
and  found  that  the  others  were  speaking  softly  near  him,  and 
that  a  dim  light  was  falling  on  his  face.
The  music  and  singing  round  them  seemed  to  falter,  and 
a  silence  fell.
Before  them  rose  Bree-hill  barring  the  way,  a  dark  mass 
against  misty  stars;  and  under  its  western  flank  nestled  a  large 
village.
Into  his  heart  the  thought  will  not 
enter  that  any  will  refuse  it,  that  having  the  Ring  we  may 
seek  to  destroy  it.
‘He’s  mad.
Now  pain  assailed  him,  and  he  felt  cold.
Water  dripped  down  from  the  thatched  eaves  above.
It  shut  with  a  clang,  and  the  lock  clicked.
He  padded  after  us  all  through  Moria  and  right  down 
to  Nimrodel.
Elrond  of  Rivendell  is  of  that  Kin.
For  the  collection  of  HUGO  BRACEGIRDLE,  from  a  con¬ 
tributor ;  on  an  (empty)  book-case.
There  were  no  more  sounds.
The  local  inhabitants  did  not  look  pleased  at 
the  prospect.
‘I  have  not  heard  that  it  was  the  fault  of  the  Elves,’  said 
Legolas.
They  climbed  down  and  out  of  the  dike  and  through  a  gap 
in  the  wall,  and  then  Tom  turned  due  north,  for  they  had 


192  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

been  bearing  somewhat  to  the  west.
If  that  was  worth  a  journey  of  a 
hundred  and  ten  days  to  hear,  you  had  best  listen  to  it.’  He 
sat  down  with  a  snort.
There  he  saw  Merry’s  feet  still  sticking  out  -  the  rest 
had  already  been  drawn  further  inside.
Some¬ 
thing  scared  Mr.
It  was  a  cheerless  land,  and  their  journey 
was  slow  and  gloomy.
For  you 
cannot  easily  talk  to  hobbits  that  are  riding,  when  you’re  on 
your  own  legs  trying  to  trot  beside  them.’ 

The  hobbits  were  delighted  to  hear  this,  and  thanked  Tom 
many  times;  but  he  laughed,  and  said  that  they  were  so  good 
at  losing  themselves  that  he  would  not  feel  happy  till  he  had 
seen  them  safe  over  the  borders  of  his  land.
I  have  never  got  over  the  fright  -  though  I  daresay 
the  beasts  knew  their  business  and  would  not  really  have 
touched  me.’ 

Pippin  laughed.
‘But  I  am  going  to  Mordor.’ 

‘I  know  that  well  enough,  Mr.
Chapter  5 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  KHAZAD-DUM 


The  Company  of  the  Ring  stood  silent  beside  the  tomb  of 
Balin.
‘After  that  I  kept  my  eyes  open.
As  they  hesitated  outside  in  the  gloom,  someone  began 
singing  a  merry  song  inside,  and  many  cheerful  voices  joined 
loudly  in  the  chorus.
At  Bilbo’s  front  door  the  old  man  began  to  unload:  there 
were  great  bundles  of  fireworks  of  all  sorts  and  shapes,  each 
labelled  with  a  large  red  G  ^  and  the  elf-rune,  JJ>!
Indeed  I  may  now  reveal  that  it  was  partly  in  hope  to  find 
that  ring  that  Balin  went  away.’ 

‘Balin  will  find  no  ring  in  Moria,’  said  Gandalf.
I’ll 
do  what  I  can  to  set  matters  right,  and  if  there’s  any  help  I 
can  give,  you’ve  only  to  name  it.
Many 
of  them  looked  to  have  been  worked  by  hands,  though  now 
they  lay  tumbled  and  ruinous  in  a  bleak,  barren  land.
I  am  going.
The  air  was  silent, 
heavy  and  chill.
It  was  time  to  start  again.
Then 
you  must  take  a  new  leader  and  follow  him  as  best  you  can.’ 

It  was  with  a  heavy  heart  that  Frodo  saw  Aragorn  and 
Legolas  climb  the  steep  hank  and  vanish  into  the  mists;  but 
his  fears  proved  groundless.
Many  evil  things  there  are  that  your 
strong  walls  and  bright  swords  do  not  stay.
The  Ring  of  the  Enemy  would  leave  its 
mark,  too,  leave  him  open  to  the  summons.
In  places  it  was  now  faint 
and  overgrown,  or  choked  with  fallen  stones  and  trees;  but 
at  one  time  it  seemed  to  have  been  much  used.
For  it  is,  of  course,  also  the  birthday  of  my 
heir  and  nephew,  Frodo.
Will  you  not  take  the  Ring?’ 

‘No!’  cried  Gandalf,  springing  to  his  feet.
Their  eyes  fell  on  him  and  pierced  him,  as  they  rushed 
towards  him.
You  are  not  supposed  to  talk  or  worry 
about  anything  today,  by  Elrond’s  orders.’ 

‘But  talking  would  stop  me  thinking  and  wondering,  which 
are  quite  as  tiring,’  said  Frodo.
Maybe  even  thou  shalt  find 
it.
But  perhaps  I  understand  things  a 
little  better  now.
‘There  are  Ores,  very  many  of  them,’  he  said.
A  bit  0’  fresh  meat  will  go  down  sweet!
For  the  fate  of 
Lothlorien  you  are  not  answerable,  but  only  for  the  doing  of 
your  own  task.
‘Don’t  be  alarmed!
And  you,  Sammie,  don’t  go 
ill-treating  my  poor  old  pony!
Tell  me  what’s  your  trouble!
The 


360  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

Shire,  I  forebode,  is  not  free  now  from  peril;  and  these  two 
I  had  thought  to  send  back  there  as  messengers,  to  do  what 
they  could,  according  to  the  fashion  of  their  country,  to  warn 
the  people  of  their  danger.
Listen  to  this!
‘The  Bridge  is  near.
‘Your  words  bring  good  counsel,  Gimli,’  said  Aragorn.
‘The  passage  is  blocked 
behind  us  now,  and  there  is  only  one  way  out  -  on  the  other 
side  of  the  mountains.
Beyond  it  was  a  large  square  chamber.
‘I  am  Mr.
‘Steady!
‘Ah,’  said  Ted,  ‘you  do,  if  you  listen.
They  now  saw  that  they  had,  in 
fact,  turned  too  much  to  the  south.
Faint  and  far  beneath  the  earth 
rolled  the  slow  drum-beats:  doom.
‘I  have,’  said  Strider.
‘Nor  me,’  muttered  Sam.
“‘Yes,  sir,  I  am  afraid  so,  sir,”  said  Butterbur,  mistaking 
me.
That  can  soon  be 
mended.
It  did  not  sound  like  the  voice  of  the  old  Sam 
Gamgee  that  he  thought  he  knew.
Merry  and  I  are  coming  with  you.
‘There  the  Misty  Mountains  divide,  and  between  their 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


369 


arms  lies  the  deep-shadowed  valley  which  we  cannot  for¬ 
get:  Azanulbizar,  the  Dimrill  Dale,  which  the  Elves  call 
Nanduhirion.’ 

‘It  is  for  the  Dimrill  Dale  that  we  are  making,’  said  Gandalf.
Do  not  worry!
Do  not 
tempt  me!
They  were  being  headed  off,  and  were 
simply  following  a  course  chosen  for  them  -  eastwards  and 
southwards,  into  the  heart  of  the  Forest  and  not  out  of  it.
But  if  you’re  going  to  do  any 
more  tumbling,  or  conjuring,  or  whatever  it  was,  you’d  best 
warn  folk  beforehand  -  and  warn  me.
Mark  my  words!
What  of 
Saruman?
Almost  at  once  the 
sun  seemed  to  sink  into  the  trees  behind  them.
But  it  was  well  given!’ 

‘I  have  often  wondered  what  you  and  Bilbo  were  doing,  so 
close  in  his  little  room,’  said  Merry.
Wake  that 
sluggard  Fatty!
They  entered  the  circle  of  white  trees.
Where  have  you  been,  my 
friend?
I  think  we  have  reached  them  now,  but  it  is 
night  outside  again,  and  we  cannot  tell  until  morning.
The  top  page  is  marked  one  -  three,  so  at  least  two 
are  missing  from  the  beginning.
At  the  top  was  a  wide 
echoing  passage.
330 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘At  once  I  took  my  leave  of  Denethor,  but  even  as  I  went 
northwards,  messages  came  to  me  out  of  Lorien  that  Aragorn 
had  passed  that  way,  and  that  he  had  found  the  creature 
called  Gollum.
‘As  you  wish.
Bilbo’s.
It  is  but 
a  trifle  that  Sauron  fancies,  and  an  earnest  of  your  good  will.
‘But  why  can’t  you  stay 
here  quiet  for  a  bit,  Mr.
‘We  think  you  had 
best  come  now  with  us.
‘Only  to  the  North  did  these  tidings  come,  and  only  to  a 
few.
‘Where  are  you?’  he  cried  out  miserably.
‘  “Are  the  Men  of  Rohan  still  to  be  trusted,  do  you  think?” 
I  said  to  Gwaihir,  for  the  treason  of  Saruman  had  shaken  my 
faith.
It  was  just  at  this  time  that  Gandalf  reappeared  after  his  long 
absence.
Of  course,  it  vanished  almost  at 
once;  but  I  went  round  the  corner  and  on  as  far  as  the  last 
house  on  the  Road.’ 

Strider  looked  at  Merry  with  wonder.
A  long  grey  road  wound  back  out  of  sight.
Frodo  looked  troubled.
Then,  mounting  their  ponies,  they 
went  slowly  on  again,  feeling  their  way  by  the  rise  and  fall  of 
the  ground.
Now  it’s  come  to 
the  point,  he’s  just  plain  terrified.
They  understood  one  another  remark¬ 
ably  well,  very  much  better  than  a  hobbit  would  understand, 
say,  a  Dwarf,  or  an  Ore,  or  even  an  Elf.
‘Hullo!
Wolf!
‘Now  tell  me  all  about  it!
What’s  the  matter  here  then?
I’d  better  send  Nob  to  look  for  him.
Once  they  were 
through  the  gap,  they  had  only  to  keep  on  in  anything  like  a 
straight  line  and  they  were  bound  in  the  end  to  strike  the 
Road.
They  turned  right 
and  followed  it  southwards.
Even  if  you  chose  for  us  an  Elf-lord,  such 
as  Glorfindel,  he  could  not  storm  the  Dark  Tower,  nor  open 
the  road  to  the  Fire  by  the  power  that  is  in  him.’ 

‘You  speak  gravely,’  said  Elrond,  ‘but  I  am  in  doubt.
for  the  bath  at  close  of  day 
that  washes  the  weary  mud  away!
‘I  may  be  back  any  day,’  he  said.
‘But  I  am  the  real  Strider,  fortunately,’  he  said,  looking 
down  at  them  with  his  face  softened  by  a  sudden  smile.
This  was  held  in  the  great  pavilion  with  the 
tree.
‘Let  Gimli 
forget  my  harsh  words:  I  spoke  in  the  trouble  of  my  heart.
‘Yet  where  they  are,  and  how 
many,  and  what  they  will  do  next,  we  do  not  know.
‘Well,  what  do  you  think  of  it?’  asked  Merry  coming  up 
the  passage.
Great  shadows  fell  across  them; 
trunks  and  branches  of  trees  hung  dark  and  threatening  over 
the  path.
I  hoped  the  river-voyage  would  beat  him, 
but  he  is  too  clever  a  waterman.
When  every  guest  had  been  welcomed  and  was  finally 
inside  the  gate,  there  were  songs,  dances,  music,  games,  and, 
of  course,  food  and  drink.
I  wonder  what  became  of  it.
And  I  am  going  to  make  for 
Bucklebury  Ferry  as  quickly  as  possible.
‘Who  are  you,  and  what  do  you  want?’ 

‘I  am  called  Strider,’  he  answered;  ‘and  though  he  may 
have  forgotten  it,  your  friend  promised  to  have  a  quiet  talk 
with  me.’ 

‘You  said  I  might  hear  something  to  my  advantage,  I 
believe,’  said  Frodo.
I 
was  stuck  over  a  line  or  two,  and  was  thinking  about  them; 
but  now  I  don’t  suppose  I  shall  ever  get  them  right.
A  marching  host  of  Elves  had  come  up  silently:  they  were 
hastening  towards  the  northern  borders  to  guard  against  any 
attack  from  Moria;  and  they  brought  news,  some  of  which 
Haldir  reported.
He  works  for  Mr.
They’re  all  Elvish  enough,  but  they’re  not  all  the  same.
My  own.
They 
stood  peering  up  the  stairs  into  the  darkness.
The 
foremost  of  the  black  horses  had  almost  set  foot  upon  the 
shore.
He 
lay  motionless,  still  listening;  but  all  was  now  silent,  and  at 
last  he  turned  and  fell  asleep  again  or  wandered  into  some 
other  unremembered  dream.
That  view  was  somehow  disquieting;  so  they  turned  from 
the  sight  and  went  down  into  the  hollow  circle.
‘I 
should  like  nothing  better  than  to  stay  in  your  house  in  peace 
for  a  while.’ 

They  tramped  off,  anxious  and  downhearted,  under  the 
eyes  of  the  crowd.
The  dark  fire  will  not  avail 
you,  flame  of  Udun.
Brandybuck  lying  by  the 
roadside.
I  am  weary  in  body  and  in  heart.’  He  cast 
himself  down  upon  his  couch  and  fell  at  once  into  a  long 
sleep.
My  darling!
Hey!
Yet  they  too  were  made  by  the  Dark 
Lord  long  ago.
Gandalf  laughed  grimly.
‘Why  didn’t  you  tell  me 
that  you  were  Gandalf ’s  friend  at  once?’  he  asked.
Of  course,  we  do  get  queer  folk  wandering 
in  these  parts  at  times.
Bilbo  left  his 
place  and  went  and  stood  on  a  chair  under  the  illuminated 
tree.
‘There  are  many  in  the 
River.
But  across  their  three  necks  lay  one  long  naked  sword.
Gimli  strode  forward  undeterred,  and  found  that 
the  water  was  shallow,  no  more  than  ankle-deep  at  the  edge.
And  I  had 
something  else  to  do.’ 

‘What  were  you  doing?’ 

‘Why,  sitting  and  thinking.
Might  I  ask  your  names,  sirs?’ 

‘Mr.
Now  it  is  your  turn, 
Frodo!’ 

‘I  am  all  right,’  said  Frodo,  reluctant  to  have  his  garments 
touched.
And  if 
he  often  uses  the  Ring  to  make  himself  invisible,  he  fades',  he 
becomes  in  the  end  invisible  permanently,  and  walks  in  the 
twilight  under  the  eye  of  the  Dark  Power  that  rules  the  Rings.
‘Alas!’  said  Celeborn.
You  will  take  the  Ring  to  Sauron 
and  sell  us  all.
My  people  live  by  the  banks  of  the 
Brandywine.’ 

‘That  is  well,’  said  Celeborn.
I  know 
we  are  going  to  take  a  very  long  road,  into  darkness;  but 
I  know  I  can’t  turn  back.
Now  perhaps  we  can  get  away  without  those  cursed 
goblins  seeing  us.’ 

‘Perhaps  so,’  said  Aragorn.
‘We  might  succeed  in 
roasting  Pippin  alive  inside.’ 

We  might  try  to  hurt  or  frighten  this  tree  to  begin  with,’ 
said  Sam  fiercely.
‘There  is  more  about 
you  than  meets  the  eye,  as  I  said  of  him  long  ago.’  Frodo 
wondered  if  the  remark  meant  more  than  it  said.
It  was  a  tendency  of  hobbit-holes 
to  get  cluttered  up:  for  which  the  custom  of  giving  so  many 
birthday-presents  was  largely  responsible.
But  he  also 
knew  that  it  could  not  see  him  -  not  yet,  not  unless  he  willed 
it.
‘We  do  not  know,’  he 


MANY  MEETINGS 


299 


answered.
He  was  wrapped  in  some 
fair  memory:  and  as  Frodo  looked  at  him  he  knew  that  he 
beheld  things  as  they  once  had  been  in  this  same  place.
Wide  grass¬ 
lands  stretched  before  them.
Snowstorms  on  January  the  twelfth:  there 
was  no  need  to  come  back  to  report  that!
As  Frodo  watched  he  saw 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


103 


something  dark  pass  across  the  lighter  space  between  two 
trees,  and  then  halt.
When  Otho 
loudly  demanded  to  see  Frodo,  Merry  bowed  politely.
Not  with  the  hope  of 
escape,  or  of  doing  anything,  either  good  or  bad:  he  simply 
felt  that  he  must  take  the  Ring  and  put  it  on  his  finger.
‘Well,  I  have  rather  a  rascally  look, 
have  I  not?’  said  Strider  with  a  curl  of  his  lip  and  a  queer 
gleam  in  his  eye.
They  may  be  a  help  in  many  needs.’ 

‘You  don’t  need  to  tell  me  that!’  said  Sam.
It  had  been  built 
a  long  while  before  by  the  Brandybucks,  for  the  use  of  guests, 
or  members  of  the  family  that  wished  to  escape  from  the 
crowded  life  of  Brandy  Hall  for  a  time.
It  wound 
up  on  to  the  top  of  a  grassy  knoll,  now  grey  under  the  pale 
starry  night;  and  there,  still  high  above  them  on  a  further 
slope,  they  saw  the  twinkling  lights  of  a  house.
At  a  gap  in  the  circle  a  great  dark  wolf-shape  could  be 
seen  halted,  gazing  at  them.
No  trace  of  the  fight  remained  but  the 
charred  trees  and  the  arrows  of  Legolas  lying  on  the  hill -top.
It  is  already  danger¬ 
ous.
‘But  they’ll  find  out  he’s  here 
without  help  from  me,  I’m  afraid.
The  valley  seemed  to  stretch  on 
endlessly.
Hooray!’  he  shouted,  and 
then  burst  into  tears.
Of  course  he’s  a  terror 
to  trespassers,  and  keeps  ferocious  dogs  -  but  after  all,  folk 
down  here  are  near  the  border  and  have  to  be  more  on  their 
guard.’ 

‘I  know,’  said  Frodo.
He 
scratched  his  head,  and  for  a  moment  had  a  passing  wish  that 
Mr.
Before  them,  but  some  distance  off, 
there  stood  a  green  hill-top,  treeless,  rising  like  a  bald  head 
out  of  the  encircling  wood.
It  seems  that  the  Lady  knows  who  and  what 
is  each  member  of  your  Company.
Their  chief  city  was  Osgiliath,  Citadel  of  the  Stars, 
through  the  midst  of  which  the  River  flowed.
The  sun  had  gone  down  red  behind  the  hills  at  their  backs, 
and  evening  was  coming  on  before  they  came  back  to  the 
road  at  the  end  of  the  long  level  over  which  it  had  run  straight 
for  some  miles.
They  had  not  gone  far  on  the  fifth  day  when  they  left  the 
last  straggling  pools  and  reed-beds  of  the  marshes  behind 
them.
Probably  a  permanent  holiday:  I  don’t 
expect  I  shall  return.
See!
See?
And  old  Mr.
Then 
at  last  his  gaze  was  held:  wall  upon  wall,  battlement  upon 
battlement,  black,  immeasurably  strong,  mountain  of  iron, 
gate  of  steel,  tower  of  adamant,  he  saw  it:  Barad-dur,  Fortress 
of  Sauron.
Fang!
‘One  Gross,  indeed!
They  all  hurried  forward,  hobbits  and  ponies.
Sam  frowned,  and 
looked  at  his  master;  and  at  last  he  broke  out: 

‘With  your  leave,  Mr.
Frodo!
There  is  an  inn,  a  merry  old  inn 
beneath  an  old  grey  hill, 

And  there  they  brew  a  beer  so  brown 
That  the  Man  in  the  Moon  himself  came  down 
one  night  to  drink  his  fill.
I  had  to  come  with  you.’ 

They  heard  Gandalf  go  back  down  the  steps  and  thrust  his 
staff  against  the  doors.
Many  of  his 
own  favourite  things  -  or  Bilbo’s  things  (they  reminded  him 
sharply  of  him  in  their  new  setting)  -  were  arranged  as  nearly 
as  possible  as  they  had  been  at  Bag  End.
‘  “The  Nine,  the  Seven,  and  the  Three,”  he  said,  “had  each 
their  proper  gem.
‘This  is  where 
we  leave  the  open  and  take  to  cover,’  said  Strider.
They  have  helped  me 
before;  and  I  shall  need  their  help  in  the  days  to  come;  for 
we  have  reached  Rivendell,  but  the  Ring  is  not  yet  at  rest.’ 

‘I  suppose  not,’  said  Frodo.
‘The  rivers  long  defended  us,  but  they  are  a  sure  guard  no 
more;  for  the  Shadow  has  crept  northward  all  about  us.
‘  “They  pay  a  tribute  of  horses,”  he  answered,  “and  send 
many  yearly  to  Mordor,  or  so  it  is  said;  but  they  are  not  yet 
under  the  yoke.
Tell  me  of  these 
havens  as  we  walk.
We  ought  to  do  a  good  step  more  today.
Can  you  hear  me  singing?
He  wore  a  tall  pointed  blue  hat,  a  long  grey  cloak,  and 
a  silver  scarf.
And 
pretending  that  you  had  come  to  the  end  of  your  money,  and 
actually  selling  your  beloved  Bag  End  to  those  Sackville- 
Bagginses!
For 
some  time  he  had  sat  silent  beside  Bilbo’s  empty  chair,  and 
ignored  all  remarks  and  questions.
Heed  no  hoary  willow!
He  ought  to  know  that  if  we 
can’t  stop  him,  we  shan’t  leave  him.’ 

‘Begging  your  pardon,’  said  Sam.
One  Ring  to  rule  them  all,  One  Ring  to  find  them, 

One  Ring  to  bring  them  all  and  in  the  darkness  bind  them 
In  the  Land  of  Mordor  where  the  Shadows  lied 

He  paused,  and  then  said  slowly  in  a  deep  voice:  ‘This  is 
the  Master-ring,  the  One  Ring  to  rule  them  all.
What  strength  have 
we  for  the  finding  of  the  Fire  in  which  it  was  made?
The  Wandering 
Companies  shall  know  of  your  journey,  and  those  that  have 
power  for  good  shall  be  on  the  watch.
I  took  it  to  keep  it  safe  but  I’ve  forgotten  to  ask  if  the  smiths 
could  mend  it.
Wait  till  we  do 
get  to  the  edge,  and  then  we’ll  turn  and  give  them  a  rousing 
chorus!’ 

He  spoke  cheerfully,  and  if  he  felt  any  great  anxiety,  he  did 
not  show  it.
It  was  thought  that  you  might  turn  far  aside  to 
avoid  pursuit,  and  become  lost  in  the  Wilderness.
Pippin  could  speak  it:  if  you  don’t  let  me  go  with  you, 
Sam,  I’ll  follow  on  my  own.’  So  Bill  was  going  as  the  beast 
of  burden,  yet  he  was  the  only  member  of  the  Company  that 
did  not  seem  depressed.
Lead  on!’ 

Gimli  now  walked  ahead  by  the  wizard’s  side,  so  eager  was 
he  to  come  to  Moria.
Let  us  go!’ 


Chapter  8 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


That  night  the  Company  was  again  summoned  to  the 
chamber  of  Celeborn,  and  there  the  Lord  and  Lady  greeted 
them  with  fair  words.
I’m  coming 
too,  or  neither  of  us  isn’t  going.
‘What  do  you  think?’  asked  Boromir  eagerly,  leaning  from 
his  boat,  as  if  he  was  trying  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  Frodo’s  face.
They  reached  the  entrance  to  the  Ferry  lane  at  last.
Here  those 
who  wish  may  await  the  oncoming  of  the  hour  till  either  the 
ways  of  the  world  lie  open  again,  or  we  summon  them  to  the 
last  need  of  Lorien.
Of  what  they  brought  to  light  the 
Ores  have  gathered  nearly  all,  and  given  it  in  tribute  to 
Sauron,  who  covets  it.
And  you  had  best  hear  it.
Then  he  taught 
them  a  rhyme  to  sing,  if  they  should  by  ill-luck  fall  into  any 
danger  or  difficulty  the  next  day.
The  hobbits  said  nothing.
Northward  beyond  the  dwindling 
downs  the  land  ran  away  in  flats  and  swellings  of  grey  and 
green  and  pale  earth-colours,  until  it  faded  into  a  featureless 
and  shadowy  distance.
And  now  I  think  it  is  time 
you  went  to  bed  and  took  what  rest  you  can.
I  put  it  by  safe.
There  lies  our  hope,  if  hope  it  be.
‘Very  good!’  said  Frodo.
The  great  voice 
rolled  out  again.
We  should 
seek  a  final  end  of  this  menace,  even  if  we  do  not  hope  to 
make  one.’ 

‘And  that  we  shall  not  find  on  the  roads  to  the  Sea,’  said 
Galdor.
It 
looked  likely  to  turn  to  rain.
But  that  is  another  thing  that  makes  me  anxious.
He  reined  his  horse  in, 
and  halted,  swaying  in  his  saddle.
They  crossed  the  bridge  and  wound  slowly  up  the  long 
steep  paths  that  led  out  of  the  cloven  vale  of  Rivendell;  and 
they  came  at  length  to  the  high  moor  where  the  wind  hissed 
through  the  heather.
‘What  do  you  know?’ 

‘Too  much;  too  many  dark  things,’  said  Strider  grimly.
Against  some  I  have  not  yet  been 
measured.
We  have  other  business.’ 

‘I  won’t  argue  with  you,’  said  Bilbo.
‘What  are  these?’  asked  Sam,  handling  one  that  lay  upon 
the  greensward.
‘Yes,  and  no,’  he  answered 
slowly.
The  Pony  is  a  good 
inn  by  all  accounts.
‘I  should  say,’  answered  Strider,  ‘that  they  stood  for  G3, 
and  were  a  sign  that  Gandalf  was  here  on  October  the  third: 
that  is  three  days  ago  now.
Look  and  be  glad,  for  you  are  the  first  dwarf  to  behold 
the  trees  of  the  Naith  of  Lorien  since  Durin’s  Day!’ 

When  his  eyes  were  in  turn  uncovered,  Frodo  looked  up 
and  caught  his  breath.
‘It  is  largely  on  account  of  Balin  that  I  have  come 
to  ask  the  advice  of  those  that  dwell  in  Rivendell.
It  was  there  that  the  snow  first  began  to  burden  us.
It  is  plain  enough  what  you  are  pointing  at.
You  should 
have  spoken.
It  is  like  lightning  that  leaps  up  from  the  hill-tops.’ 

Frodo  lay  down  again,  but  for  a  long  while  he  could  still 
see  the  white  flashes,  and  against  them  the  tall  dark  figure  of 
Strider,  standing  silent  and  watchful.
Hope  leaped  in  his  heart.
I  don’t  know  half  of  you  half  as  well  as  I  should  like;  and  I 
like  less  than  half  of  you  half  as  well  as  you  deserve.
Above  the 
arch  there  was  a  lamp,  and  beneath  it  swung  a  large  sign¬ 
board:  a  fat  white  pony  reared  up  on  its  hind  legs.
‘And  you,  Ferny,’  he  said,  ‘put  your 
ugly  face  out  of  sight,  or  it  will  get  hurt.’  With  a  sudden  flick, 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


237 


quick  as  lightning,  an  apple  left  his  hand  and  hit  Bill  square 
on  the  nose.
‘The  love  of 
the  Elves  for  their  land  and  their  works  is  deeper  than  the 
deeps  of  the  Sea,  and  their  regret  is  undying  and  cannot  ever 
wholly  be  assuaged.
The  passing  seasons  are  but  ripples  ever  repeated  in  the  long 
long  stream.
‘Don’t  go 
arguing  with  any  foreigners,  and  come  straight  back!’ 

‘I  will!’  said  he,  and  drove  out  of  the  gate.
The 
sun  had  now  climbed  far  into  the  morning,  and  the  clouds 
and  mists  of  the  night  were  gone.
‘There  are  various  queer  things  living  deep  in  the  Forest, 
and  on  the  far  side,’  said  Merry,  ‘or  at  least  I  have  heard  so; 
but  I  have  never  seen  any  of  them.
‘They  have  left  us  fruit  and  drink,  and  bread,’  said  Pippin.
Doom,  doom.
But  I  will  always  help  you.’  He  laid  his  hand  on  Frodo’s 
shoulder.
You  were  shut  up  for  hours.’ 

‘Talking,’  said  Bilbo.
Gandalf  would  admit  that  there  had  been  nothing  else 
he  could  do.
I  also  fear,  if  you  want  to 
know,  that  it  is  no  joke  at  all;  and  that  I  am  not  safe  here  or 
anywhere  else.’  He  looked  round  at  the  windows  and  walls, 
as  if  he  was  afraid  they  would  suddenly  give  way.
‘This  is  Bam- 
furlong,  old  Farmer  Maggot’s  land.
I 
myself  shall  turn  back  at  once.”  And  with  that  he  mounted 
and  would  have  ridden  straight  off.
Their  stems  were  smooth  and  black,  but  a  red  glow  was 
darkly  mirrored  in  their  sides.
What  do  you  want,  and  where  do  you  come  from?’  he 
asked  gruffly.
Excitement  rose  to 
its  height.
It’s  lucky  for  you  that  I  know  you.
Its  beak  shone  like  burnished  gold, 
and  its  eyes  glinted  like  jet  set  in  yellow  stones;  its  huge  white 
wings  were  half  lifted.
I  don’t  think  much 
of  your  diary,  he  said.
All  the  same,  I’m 


470 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


beginning  to  feel  that  if  we’ve  got  to  go  on,  then  we’d  best 
get  it  over.
‘Few  of  that 
fairest  folic  are  ever  seen  in  the  Shire.
Throwing  back 
his  cloak,  he  laid  his  hand  on  the  hilt  of  a  sword  that  had 
hung  concealed  by  his  side.
At  length  they  came  to  a  sharp  bend.
There  is  a  seed  of  courage 
hidden  (often  deeply,  it  is  true)  in  the  heart  of  the  fattest 
and  most  timid  hobbit,  waiting  for  some  final  and  desperate 
danger  to  make  it  grow.
‘We  cannot  build  a  house,  but  tonight  we  will  do  as  the 
Galadhrim  and  seek  refuge  in  the  tree-tops,  if  we  can.
Every  now  and 
again  it  descended  a  flight  of  steps,  fifty  or  more,  to  a  lower 
level.
At  once  the  white  horse  sprang  away  and  sped  like  the 
wind  along  the  last  lap  of  the  Road.
The  world  has  changed  much 
since  I  last  was  on  the  westward  roads.
Such  things  they  found  here,  it  is  true,  especially 
iron;  but  they  did  not  need  to  delve  for  them:  all  things  that 
they  desired  they  could  obtain  in  traffic.
‘Fly!
I  saw  what  I  took  to  be  a  log  floating  along 
in  the  half-light  behind  Gimli’s  boat;  but  I  didn’t  give  much 
heed  to  it.
He  grew 
stronger  and  bolder  with  new  food  and  new  air.
My  mind  is  clearer  now.’ 

‘Then  you  will  come  to  Minas  Tirith?’  cried  Boromir.
I  says  to  him.
Uncanny,  I  called  it.
‘Hobbits  really  are 
amazing  creatures,  as  I  have  said  before.
Warn  him!
Can’t  we  think  of  some  names  now?
When  the  old  man,  helped  by  Bilbo  and  some  dwarves, 
had  finished  unloading,  Bilbo  gave  a  few  pennies  away;  but 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY  33 

not  a  single  squib  or  cracker  was  forthcoming,  to  the  dis¬ 
appointment  of  the  onlookers.
‘Master  Merry’s  being  squeezed  in  a  crack!’  cried  Sam.
Where  did  you  get  to,  Frodo?’ 

‘I  thought  that  I  was  lost,’  said  Frodo;  ‘but  I  don’t  want 
to  speak  of  it.
‘That  is  the  purpose  for  which  you  are  called  hither.
In 
the  midst  of  the  vessel  sat  Celeborn,  and  behind  him  stood 
Galadriel,  tall  and  white;  a  circlet  of  golden  flowers  was  in 
her  hair,  and  in  her  hand  she  held  a  harp,  and  she  sang.
Standing  upon  the  rim  of  the  ruined  circle,  they  saw  all 
round  below  them  a  wide  prospect,  for  the  most  part  of  lands 
empty  and  featureless,  except  for  patches  of  woodland  away 
to  the  south,  beyond  which  they  caught  here  and  there  the 
glint  of  distant  water.
The  Three  are  hidden 
still.
They  tramped  on 
again.
‘What  do  you  advise  us  to  do?’  asked  Frodo.
Tom’s  in  a  hurry  now.
I  wonder  if  it’s  any  good  trying  to 
finish  my  book?
The  grass  was  growing  fast.
The  sound  of  hoofs  stopped.
I  daresay  it  will  be  homelike  enough.
But  I 
learned  then  first  that  Gollum’s  ring  came  out  of  the  Great 
River  nigh  to  the  Gladden  Fields.
For  a  while  he  was  as  still  as  if  his  own 
curse  had  struck  him  down;  then  suddenly  he  wept.
Do  as  you 
will!’ 

‘I  will  look,’  said  Frodo,  and  he  climbed  on  the  pedestal 
and  bent  over  the  dark  water.
Though  he  walked  and  breathed,  and  about  him  living 
leaves  and  flowers  were  stirred  by  the  same  cool  wind  as 
fanned  his  face,  Frodo  felt  that  he  was  in  a  timeless  land  that 
did  not  fade  or  change  or  fall  into  forgetfulness.
But  you  return  now 
as  a  member  of  the  Ring’s  Company,  and  you  are  in  peril  as 


386 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


long  as  you  remain  with  us.
Battle  is  at  hand.
They 
have  crossed  the  River  secretly  and  are  moving  westward.
You 
may  be  weary  before  we  halt.’ 

‘Why?
Have  peace  until  the  morning!
An  si  Tintalle  Varda  Oiolosseo 
ve  fanyar  maryat  Elentdri  ortane, 
ar  ilye  tier  undulave  lumbule; 
ar  sindanoriello  caita  mornie 
i  falmalinnar  imbe  met,  ar  hisie 
untupa  Calaciryo  miri  oiale.
‘I  haven’t  van¬ 
ished.
In  a  cave  in  the  hills  he  dwelt  alone, 

And  meat  was  hard  to  come  by.
You  do  not  look  evil!
His  worst  mischief  was  done.
‘I  have  returned  from  the  Northern  Fences,’  said  the  Elf, 
‘and  I  am  sent  now  to  be  your  guide  again.
But  I  shall  try  to  get  lost  as  soon  as  possible.
Beyond  there  seemed  to  lie  a  wide  chamber  cut  in  the  rock.
Maggot  bustled  in  and  out.
‘But  you  are  all  worrying  yourselves  unnecess¬ 
arily.
‘I’ll 
talk  to  you  later.’ 

Meanwhile  an  argument  was  going  on  by  the  fireplace.
‘We  must  reach  the  doors  before  sunset,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘or 
I  fear  we  shall  not  reach  them  at  all.
Its  victory  is  at  hand;  and  there  will  be  rich  reward  for 
those  that  aided  it.
Then  there  came  an  echoing  blast:  a  great  horn  was 
blown  in  the  hall,  and  answering  horns  and  harsh  cries  were 
heard  further  off.
Many  young  hobbits  were  included,  and 
present  by  parental  permission;  for  hobbits  were  easy-going 
with  their  children  in  the  matter  of  sitting  up  late,  especially 
when  there  was  a  chance  of  getting  them  a  free  meal.
‘What  have  you  to  say?’ 

‘Several  things,’  answered  Strider.
Frodo  and  look  after  his 
bit  of  garden’;  an  arrangement  that  was  approved  by  the 
Gaffer,  though  it  did  not  console  him  for  the  prospect  of 
having  Lobelia  as  a  neighbour.
No  need  to  trouble 
Strider  or  the  others  tonight.
The  next  day  Frodo  became  really  anxious,  and  kept 
a  constant  look-out  for  Gandalf.
Boromir  muttered  under  his  breath,  but  the  echoing  stone 
magnified  the  sound  to  a  hoarse  whisper  that  all  could  hear: 
‘In  the  deep  places  of  the  world!
But  come 
and  look!’ 

They  peered  out.
To  him,  I  mean,  begging  your  pardon,  Master 
Boromir,’  he  added,  and  turned.
But  Bilbo  made  no  mistake  in  choosing  his  heir,  though  he 
little  thought  how  important  it  would  prove.
Gandalf  turned  and 
paused.
The  Winter  comes,  the  bare  and  leafless  Day; 

The  leaves  are  falling  in  the  stream,  the  River  flows  away.
What  do  you  say,  Sam?’ 

‘I  will  go  along  with  you,  Mr.
I  could  not  see  any  face,  for  his  hood  fell  down 
so  low;  and  I  felt  a  sort  of  shiver  down  my  back.
On  the  last  occasion  he  beat  me,  and  then 


120 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


took  me  and  showed  me  to  his  dogs.
They  were  in 
a  deep  lane  between  the  ends  of  the  wall,  and  passing  quickly 
through  it  they  entered  the  City  of  the  Trees.
But  no  hobbit  has  such  a  voice.’ 

No  more  was  said  about  it.
The 
inheritance  is  mine  alone.
The  others  looked  at  him  in 
surprise.
Along  this  they  went  westward,  with 
the  city  ever  climbing  up  like  a  green  cloud  upon  their  left; 
and  as  the  night  deepened  more  lights  sprang  forth,  until  all 
the  hill  seemed  afire  with  stars.
I  regret  to 
announce  that  -  though,  as  I  said,  eleventy-one  years  is  far  too 
short  a  time  to  spend  among  you  -  this  is  the  END.
They  passed  into  a  hall, 
bright  with  daylight  from  its  high  windows  in  the  east.
Whence  it  came  we  did  not  at 
first  perceive.
Their  hearts  were  rejoiced  to  see  the  light  of 
the  fire.
Baggins  would  pay 
for  it.
Not  even  on  the  knees  of  Caradhras  will 
we  wait  for  another  night-fall!’ 

A  cold  wind  flowed  down  behind  them,  as  they  turned 
their  backs  on  the  Redhorn  Gate,  and  stumbled  wearily  down 
the  slope.
‘This  is  madness!
I  have  never  seen  or  heard  tell  of  one 
so  fair.
He  paused,  silent  for  a  moment.
The  sun  was  shining  through  the 
fluttering  leaves,  which  were  still  green  upon  the  tree.
He  stepped  back 
shaking  all  over  and  looked  at  the  Lady.
I  know 
their  number.
But  after  a  time  the  trees  began  to  close  in  again, 
just  where  they  had  appeared  from  a  distance  to  be  thinner 
and  less  tangled.
‘Look!’  said  Merry.
At  dusk  the  Company 
set  out,  and  turning  now  half  east  they  steered  their  course 
towards  Caradhras,  which  far  away  still  glowed  faintly  red  in 
the  last  light  of  the  vanished  Sun.
And  both  my  fear 
and  my  hope  proved  ill-founded.
Frodo  suddenly  felt  very  foolish,  and  found  himself  (as 
was  his  habit  when  making  a  speech)  fingering  the  things  in 
his  pocket.
Good-bye!’ 


54 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Frodo  saw  him  to  the  door.
Above  him  was  a 
black  starry  sky.
Frodo  had  a  very  trying  time  that  afternoon.
We  cannot 
get  out.
I  liked  it  not  at  all.
On  the  third  day  out  from  Bree  they  came  out  of  the 
Chetwood.
He  felt  that  black  shapes  were 
advancing  to  smother  him;  but  when  he  sat  up  he  saw  nothing 
but  the  back  of  Strider  sitting  hunched  up,  smoking  his  pipe, 
and  watching.
A  bright  fire 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


6l 


was  on  the  hearth,  but  the  sun  was  warm,  and  the  wind  was 
in  the  South.
I 
shall  wait  for  him.’ 

Bilbo  took  out  the  envelope,  but  just  as  he  was  about  to  set 
it  by  the  clock,  his  hand  jerked  back,  and  the  packet  fell  on 
the  floor.
The  twigs  of  the  trees  above  them  began  to  drip.
They’ve 
dug  up  Bagshot  Row,  and  there’s  the  poor  old  Gaffer  going 
down  the  Hill  with  his  bits  of  things  on  a  barrow.
Anyway  I  mean  to  enjoy  myself  on  Thursday, 
and  have  my  little  joke.’ 

‘Who  will  laugh,  I  wonder?’  said  Gandalf,  shaking  his  head.
It  fled 
as  soon  as  I  touched  the  tree-stem.
‘He 
is  a  small  thing,  you  say,  this  Gollum?
‘That  the  Nine  had  indeed  arisen  I  felt  assured,  apart  from 
the  words  of  Saruman  which  might  be  lies.
Elrond  was  there,  and  several  others  were  seated  in  silence 
about  him.
They  halted  suddenly  on  the  edge, 
and  peered  through  the  tree-trunks,  holding  their  breath.
‘There  are  evil  things  written  on  this  hilt,’  he  said;  ‘though 
maybe  your  eyes  cannot  see  them.
One  struck  Frodo  and  sprang 
back.
The  others  may  follow  as  they  wish.
‘There!’ 
he  said,  pointing  with  his  staff  to  the  middle  of  the  floor.
And  now  to  bed!’  sang 
Pippin  in  a  high  voice.
‘A  lot  goes 
on  behind  his  round  face  that  does  not  come  out  in  his  talk.
‘I  must  go  home.
Let 
us  hope  that  no  evil  has  yet  come  here.’ 

They  drew  up  their  boats  on  the  green  banks,  and  beside 
them  they  made  their  camp.
Wilderland  was 
behind  them.
Then,  each  in  an  angle  of  the  great 
tree’s  roots,  they  curled  up  in  their  cloaks  and  blankets,  and 
were  soon  fast  asleep.
Long  ere  I  came 
to  Isengard  I  had  heard  tidings  by  the  way  that  could  not  be 
mistaken.
He’s  a  bit  hasty.
‘What  happened  away  up  there  at  the  door?’  he  asked.
I  am  getting  very 


86 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


anxious.
But  we  must 
have  power,  power  to  order  all  things  as  we  will,  for  that  good 
which  only  the  Wise  can  see.
In  it  were  no  tables,  but  a  bright  fire  was 
burning  in  a  great  hearth  between  the  carven  pillars  upon 
either  side.
When  they  turned  again, 
Goldberry  stood  in  the  door  behind,  framed  in  light.
The  time  of  the  Elves  is  over,  but  our  time  is  at 
hand:  the  world  of  Men,  which  we  must  rule.
There  are  others.
Suddenly  his  voice  came 
floating  back  to  them  in  a  loud  halloo!
‘The  river  of 
this  valley  is  under  his  power,  and  it  will  rise  in  anger  when 
he  has  great  need  to  bar  the  Ford.
‘It  is  also  as  good  a  way  of  saying 
“here  we  are”  as  I  can  think  of,  bar  shouting.’ 

Down  in  the  lowest  and  most  sheltered  corner  of  the  dell 
they  lit  a  fire,  and  prepared  a  meal.
I  wish  I  had,  or  you  had  told  me  about  it  before.
Each  time 
they  clambered  out,  the  trees  seemed  deeper  and  darker;  and 
always  to  the  left  and  upwards  it  was  most  difficult  to  find  a 
way,  and  they  were  forced  to  the  right  and  downwards.
But  we  must  go 
on;  and  it  is  no  good  our  delaying  the  passage  of  the  moun¬ 
tains.
And  we’d  been  a  week 
on  the  way  last  night,  when  up  pops  a  New  Moon  as  thin  as 
a  nail-paring,  as  if  we  had  never  stayed  no  time  in  the  Elvish 
country.
He  may 
become  like  a  glass  filled  with  a  clear  light  for  eyes  to  see  that 
can.’ 

‘You  look  splendid,’  he  said  aloud.
Tom  has  his 
house  to  mind,  and  Goldberry  is  waiting.’ 

It  was  still  fairly  early  by  the  sun,  something  between  nine 
and  ten,  and  the  hobbits  turned  their  minds  to  food.
Of  course  you  are.
Far  away  answering  horns  were  heard.
So  far  we  have  been 
given  nothing  more  to  go  on  than  Farmer  Maggot’s  guess 
that  it  has  something  to  do  with  old  Bilbo’s  treasure.’ 

‘That  was  only  a  guess,’  said  Frodo  hastily.
Sam  gripped 
him  by  the  jacket,  and  dragged  him  from  under  the  root;  and 
then  with  difficulty  hauled  him  on  to  the  bank.
‘To  walk  to  Bucklebury  as  quickly  as  possible,’  answered 
Frodo,  and  gave  his  attention  to  the  food.
‘The  Men  of  Gondor  are  valiant,  and  they  will  never  sub¬ 
mit;  but  they  may  be  beaten  down.
I  didn’t  understand  that  it  was  really  you  speaking 
until  near  the  end.’ 

‘It  is  difficult  to  keep  awake  here,  until  you  get  used  to  it,’ 
said  Bilbo.
Twice  the  messenger 
has  returned,  and  has  gone  unanswered.
At  last  Frodo  spoke: 

‘Did  you  hear  me  calling,  Master,  or  was  it  just  chance  that 
brought  you  at  that  moment?’ 

Tom  stirred  like  a  man  shaken  out  of  a  pleasant  dream.
‘We  have  done  well,’  he  said.
Let 
us  go  towards  that  light  in  the  north  door.
It  is 
pretty  generally  known  that  you  are  coming  back  to  live  at 
Crickhollow.’ 

Frodo  sat  for  a  while  in  thought.
And  then  to  bed!
He  is  learned  in  the  lore  of  the  Rings,  yet  he  is 
not  among  us.
He  turned,  and 
there  in  the  cold  glow  he  saw  lying  beside  him  Sam,  Pippin, 
and  Merry.
I  could  not  find  him 
again.
The  air  seemed  heavy  and  the  making  of  words  wearisome.
Small  wonder  is  it  that  you  have  not  heard  them, 
Boromir.
And 
then  he  comes  back  and  orders  them  off;  and  he  goes  on 
living  and  living,  and  never  looking  a  day  older,  bless  him!
But  if  you’ll  pardon  my  speaking  out,  I  think  my 
master  was  right.
They  took  no  notice  of  him.
That  seems  to  me  what 
this  Council  has  to  decide,  and  all  that  it  has  to  decide.
‘Or  break  it,’  said  Elrond.
One  day  it  was  very  hot,  and  as  he 
was  bending  over  a  pool,  he  felt  a  burning  on  the  back  of  his 
head,  and  a  dazzling  light  from  the  water  pained  his  wet  eyes.
The  Hunter’s  Moon  waxed  round  in  the  night  sky,  and 
put  to  flight  all  the  lesser  stars.
Of 


358 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


the  Black  Riders  no  other  trace  was  to  be  seen,  and  nowhere 
was  their  presence  to  be  felt.
He  half 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


91 


expected  to  see  Gandalf  come  striding  up  through  the  dusk.
‘Beyond 
Lothlorien  I  do  not  know  what  Gandalf  intended  to  do.
But  I  feel  very  small,  and  very  uprooted,  and  well 
-  desperate.
‘I 
have  not  spoken  to  the  others  about  the  Barrow.
Aragorn  had  Anduril  but  no  other 
weapon,  and  he  went  forth  clad  only  in  rusty  green  and 
brown,  as  a  Ranger  of  the  wilderness.
I  am  leaving  everything  to  him,  of  course, 
except  a  few  oddments.
‘If  you 
bring  a  Ranger  with  you,  it  is  well  to  pay  attention  to  him, 
especially  if  the  Ranger  is  Aragorn.
There  were  his  fine  new  friends,  who 
would  help  him  in  his  revenge!
Goes 
about  at  a  great  pace  on  his  long  shanks;  though  he  don’t  tell 
nobody  what  cause  he  has  to  hurry.
‘Others  dwelt 
here  before  hobbits  were;  and  others  will  dwell  here  again 
when  hobbits  are  no  more.
The  travellers  now  turned  their  faces  to  the  journey;  the 
sun  was  before  them,  and  their  eyes  were  dazzled,  for  all  were 
filled  with  tears.
He  pressed  him 
for  news  of  himself  and  of  the  wide  world,  and  soon  they 
were  deep  in  talk,  and  they  stayed  up  far  into  the  night.
Anarion  was  slain,  and  Isildur  was  slain;  and  Gil-galad 
and  Elendil  were  no  more.
He 
felt  desperate:  lost  and  witless.
Gandalf  spared  them  one  more  mouthful  each  of  the 
miruvor  of  Rivendell.
Boromir  stepped  out  of  the  circle  and  stared  up  into  the 
blackness.
They 
sprang  up  as  the  travellers  approached,  and  Frodo  saw  that 
they  were  tall  and  clad  in  grey  mail,  and  from  their  shoulders 
hung  long  white  cloaks.
You  are  all  to  walk  free,  even 
the  dwarf  Gimli.
‘It’s  a  long  time  since  I  saw  you  round 
here.
It  seemed  to  grow  larger  as  it  lay  for  a  moment  on  his  big 
brown-skinned  hand.
He  had 
difficulty  in  keeping  from  laughter  at  the  indignant  surprise 
of  the  guests.
But 
autumn  was  waning  fast;  slowly  the  golden  light  faded  to  pale 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


357 


silver,  and  the  lingering  leaves  fell  from  the  naked  trees.
Great  perils  lie  before  me.’ 

He  went  to  the  window  and  drew  aside  the  curtains  and 
the  shutters.
The 
line  of  the  River  grew  nearer;  and  the  Black  Riders  began  to 
seem  like  phantoms  of  the  woods  now  left  far  behind.
We  must  stop  talking 
aloud,  rest  quietly,  and  set  the  watch.’ 

It  was  Sam’s  turn  that  day  to  take  the  first  watch,  but 
Aragorn  joined  him.
‘He  told  me  the  true  story  soon  after  I  came 
to  live  here.
Frodo  sat  and  listened  to  the  faint  lap  and  gurgle  of  the  River 
fretting  among  the  tree-roots  and  driftwood  near  the  shore, 
until  his  head  nodded  and  he  fell  into  an  uneasy  sleep.
‘Now  you  have 
come  thus  far,  you  must  be  brought  before  the  Lord  and  the 
Lady.
He  arrived  in  the  grey  morning,  and  seeks 
for  counsel.
Let  us  take  this  wood  that  is  set  ready 
for  the  fire  as  a  sign.
Tried  to  get  in  here  to  see  you,  before  you’d 
had  bite  or  sup,  he  did.’ 

‘He  did!’  said  Strider  suddenly,  coming  forward  into  the 
light.
Frodo  felt  Bilbo  stir  impatiently  at  his  side.
Very  soon  it  would  nail  him  down,  know  just  exactly  where 
he  was.
The  air  was  very  bright  and  still,  and  there  was  a 
silence,  except  for  the  high  distant  song  of  larks.
Frodo  sat  upon  the  horse 
in  a  dark  dream.
Gum  by!
‘But  don’t  ask 
any  more  now!
It  was  the  last 
drop  of  Old  Winyards.
In  the  small  hours  he  got  up  and  came 
to  Frodo,  whose  turn  it  was  to  watch.
‘I  said  to  myself:  “dreaming  again,  Sam  Gamgee,”  I  said; 
and  I  said  no  more  just  then.
You  must  have  noticed  him  among  the  company: 
a  swarthy  sneering  fellow.
now!
‘I 
was  nearly  forgetting,’  he  said.
The  shadow  of  the  Misty 
Mountains  lay  upon  it,  but  eastwards  there  was  a  golden  light 
on  the  land.
‘Nay,  time  does  not  tarry  ever,’ 
he  said;  ‘but  change  and  growth  is  not  in  all  things  and  places 
alike.
‘Unless  things  are  altogether  changed,  eyes  that  know 
what  to  look  for  may  discover  the  signs.’ 

He  walked  forward  to  the  wall.
Frodo  stepped  inside  the  dark  door.
For  you  have  come,  and  that 
was  all  the  purpose  of  my  message.
At  length  he  spoke  again,  softly, 
as  if  he  was  debating  with  himself.
Very  soon  they  were  laughing,  and  snapping  their  fingers 
at  rain,  and  at  Black  Riders.
He  was  almost  certain  that  he  could  hear 
stealthy  movements  at  the  tree’s  foot  far  below.
Have  you  ever  tried?’ 

‘No.
Suspicion  fell 
on  him  at  once.
‘Here  is  the  gift  of  Celeborn  and  Galadriel  to  the  leader  of 
your  Company,’  she  said  to  Aragorn,  and  she  gave  him  a 
sheath  that  had  been  made  to  fit  his  sword.
I  have  been  idle  longer  than  I  should.’ 

He  spoke  lightly,  but  it  seemed  to  Frodo  that  he  looked 
rather  worried.
At  first  he  thought 
it  was  a  great  wind  coming  over  the  leaves  of  the  forest.
‘Supper  is  ready,’  said 
Goldberry;  and  now  the  hobbits  saw  that  she  was  clothed  all 
in  silver  with  a  white  girdle,  and  her  shoes  were  like  fishes’ 
mail.
In  the  middle 
there  was  a  wood-fire  blazing,  and  upon  the  tree-pillars 
torches  with  lights  of  gold  and  silver  were  burning  steadily.
Gandalf  came  quickly  to  his  side.
It 


526 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


seemed  different  so  far  away,  in  the  Shire  or  in  Rivendell.
The  translation  should 
have  been:  Say  “Friend”  and  enter.
But  when  they  had  drunk  she 
commanded  them  to  sit  again  on  the  grass,  and  chairs  were 
set  for  her  and  for  Celeborn.
They  were  cut  off  from  the  wind  by  the  ridge 
behind,  and  the  air  was  still  and  stuffy.
The  Shire  had  seldom  seen  so  fair  a  summer,  or  so 
rich  an  autumn:  the  trees  were  laden  with  apples,  honey  was 
dripping  in  the  combs,  and  the  corn  was  tall  and  full.
‘Don’t  be  afraid!’  he  said.
‘He  ought  to  hear  this.
‘Do  as  I  say!’  said  Gandalf  fiercely.
Bilbo  had  used  the  Ring.
Now  and  again  he 
spoke  to  those  that  served  him  and  thanked  them  in  their 
own  language.
‘And  this  is  the  dreadful  chance,  Frodo.
Stronger  than  the  foundations  of  the  earth.
His  pony  reared 
and  snorted,  and  he  fell  off.
Still,  we  have 
thrust  a  lane  through  the  drift;  and  for  that  all  here  may  be 
grateful  who  cannot  run  as  light  as  Elves.’ 

‘But  how  are  we  to  get  down  there,  even  if  you  have  cut 
through  the  drift?’  said  Pippin,  voicing  the  thought  of  all  the 
hobbits.
‘But  I  hope 
I  do  get  back  some  day.
‘Not  that  the  Brandy- 
bucks  of  Buckland  live  in  the  Old  Forest;  but  they’re  a  queer 
breed,  seemingly.
Suddenly  the  wizard’s  head 
appeared  at  the  window.
‘It  is  a  song  to  Elbereth,’  said  Bilbo.
This  is  the  Second  Hall  of  Old  Moria;  and  the  Gates 
are  near:  away  beyond  the  eastern  end,  on  the  left,  not  more 
than  a  quarter  of  a  mile.
Is 
all  the  Shire  discussing  my  departure  then?’ 

‘Oh  no!’  said  Merry.
And  he  had  other 
troubles.
Tom  Bombadil  burst  out  laughing.
‘It  has  been  called  that  before,’  he  said,  ‘but 
not  by  you.’ 

‘But  I  say  it  now.
They  looked  now 
as  if  they  were  only  very  deeply  asleep.
The  strongest  of  us  must 
seek  a  way.
The  blame 
was  mostly  laid  on  Gandalf.
Frodo  heard  Sam  at 
his  side  weeping,  and  then  he  found  that  he  himself  was 
weeping  as  he  ran.
Frodo  went  in  once,  long  ago.
derry  dol!
And  I  could  not 
“make”  you  -  except  by  force,  which  would  break  your  mind.
He 
put  out  his  arm  and  saw  the  dim  white  flakes  of  snow  settling 
on  his  sleeve.
Each  step  forward  became  more  reluctant  than  the  last.
‘I  guess 
you  mean  that  it  is  time  your  master  went  to  bed.’ 

‘Well,  sir,  there  is  a  Council  early  tomorrow,  I  hear,  and 
he  only  got  up  today  for  the  first  time.’ 

‘Quite  right,  Sam,’  laughed  Bilbo.
They  despaired,  until  I  returned  and  told  them 
that  the  drift  was  little  wider  than  a  wall.
The  Sackville-Bagginses  scowled,  and  wondered 
what  was  meant  by  ‘coming  into  his  inheritance’.
And 
then  they  lost  no  more  time.
But  why  then  should  we  seek  a  broken  sword?’ 

‘The  words  were  not  the  doom  of  Minas  Tirith ,’  said 
Aragorn.
My  folk  have  never 
had  dealings  with  any  of  the  servants  of  the  Enemy.
‘Speak  no  more  of  it!
as  my  gaffer  used  to  say.
62 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Y es,  sooner  or  later  -  later,  if  he  is  strong  or  well-meaning  to 
begin  with,  but  neither  strength  nor  good  purpose  will  last  - 
sooner  or  later  the  Dark  Power  will  devour  him.’ 

‘How  terrifying!’  said  Frodo.
But  that  does  not  matter 
much  now.
‘Ah!’  said  Mr.
But  Saruman 
said  nay,  and  repeated  what  he  had  said  to  us  before:  that 
the  One  would  never  again  be  found  in  Middle-earth.
They  made  ready,  packing  their  bags  and  lading  their  ponies.
The  banks  slid  by.
I  would  have  travelled  lighter  and  brought  no  animal,  least  of 
all  this  one  that  Sam  is  fond  of,  if  I  had  had  my  way.
‘It’s  out  of  his  own 


272  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

head,  of  course,’  said  Frodo.
‘It  is  quite  made  up.
But  the  air  was  chill  again; 
already  the  wind  was  turning  back  towards  the  east.
Si  vanwa  na,  Romello  vanwa,  Valimar!
It  had  obviously  turned  up  just  so  as  to  be 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


75 


a  present.
Go 
away  and  leave  it  behind.
The  Ores  have  often 
plundered  Moria;  there  is  nothing  left  in  the  upper  halls.
‘I  will  risk  a  brief  tale 
without  consulting  Elrond.
I  wish  this  lot  would  go  off  to  Hobbiton!
At  this  a  chorus  of  voices  broke  out.
‘I  will  shorten 
the  stirrups  up  to  the  saddle-skirts,  and  you  must  sit  as  tight 
as  you  can.
Why 
can’t  we  stop  him?’ 

We  must  stop  him,’  said  Pippin.
‘There  are  none.
As  for  Bilbo  Baggins,  even  while  he  was  making  his  speech, 
he  had  been  fingering  the  golden  ring  in  his  pocket:  his  magic 
ring  that  he  had  kept  secret  for  so  many  years.
Frodo  watched  them, 
wondering  which  way  the  debate  would  go.
It  had 
been  planted  many  generations  ago,  and  was  now  thick  and 
tall,  for  it  was  constantly  tended.
‘And  if  that  is  not  proof  enough,  Galdor,  there  is  the  other 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


331 


test  that  I  spoke  of.
If  you  want  to  know, 
you  have  all  come  out  from  your  feast  too  soon,  and  you 


MANY  MEETINGS 


301 


have  disturbed  me  -  in  the  middle  of  making  up  a  song.
Frodo  saw  Glorfindel  and  Gloin;  and  in  a  corner 
alone  Strider  was  sitting,  clad  in  his  old  travel-worn  clothes 
again.
The  riches  he  had 
brought  back  from  his  travels  had  now  become  a  local  legend, 
and  it  was  popularly  believed,  whatever  the  old  folk  might 
say,  that  the  Hill  at  Bag  End  was  full  of  tunnels  stuffed  with 
treasure.
But  I  did 
not  see  why  he  should  come  riding  over  my  land  so  bold.
We’re  a  bit  suspicious 
round  here  of  anything  out  of  the  way  -  uncanny,  if  you 
understand  me;  and  we  don’t  take  to  it  all  of  a  sudden.’ 

‘I  shan’t  be  doing  anything  of  the  sort  again,  Mr.
They 
groped  their  way  down  a  long  flight  of  steps,  and  then  looked 
back;  but  they  could  see  nothing,  except  high  above  them  the 
faint  glimmer  of  the  wizard’s  staff.
408  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

But  the  lid  is  broken,  and  we  must  all  take  care  in  the  dark.’ 

Pippin  felt  curiously  attracted  by  the  well.
‘None  at  all,’  he  said.
‘The  hour  is  long  passed.
Thus,  at  last,  they  came  beyond  hope  under  the  sky  and 
felt  the  wind  on  their  faces.
The  younger  hobbits  wore  the 
swords  that  they  had  taken  from  the  barrow;  but  Frodo  took 
only  Sting;  and  his  mail-coat,  as  Bilbo  wished,  remained 
hidden.
‘Frodo!
We  had  made  no  secret 
of  our  return  journey  to  his  home  in  the  West.
He  is  the  Chief  of  the  Dunedain  in  the  North, 
and  few  are  now  left  of  that  folk.’ 

‘Then  it  belongs  to  you,  and  not  to  me  at  all!’  cried  Frodo 
in  amazement,  springing  to  his  feet,  as  if  he  expected  the 
Ring  to  be  demanded  at  once.
‘Or  it  might  be  an 


528 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


hour.
450 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘I  did  not  shoot,  for  I  dared  not  arouse  any  cries:  we  cannot 
risk  battle.
Naught  worse  than  that,  eh?
If  they  could  pass 
that,  they  would  be  free.
Ragged  clouds 
were  hurrying  overhead,  dark  and  low.
‘Once  I  do  get  to  sleep,’  said  Sam,  ‘I  shall  go  on  sleeping, 
whether  I  roll  off  or  no.
Sleep  now!
It  is  his  great  hope  and 
our  great  fear.’ 

‘Why,  why  wasn’t  it  destroyed?’  cried  Frodo.
‘The  water  is  not  deep.
Merry  went  in  front  leading  a  laden  pony,  and  took 
his  way  along  a  path  that  went  through  a  spinney  behind  the 
house,  and  then  cut  across  several  fields.
‘It  is  still  winter,  and  we  are  far  from  the  sea.
But 
each  to  his  own  kind.
The  rider  was  nearly  on  them.
The 
other  had  gone  down  to  take  up  his  watch  on  one  of  the  lower 
branches.
‘I  think,’  he  said,  ‘that  there  is  a 
light  ahead.
Long  ago 
they  fell  under  the  dominion  of  the  One,  and  they  became 
Ringwraiths,  shadows  under  his  great  Shadow,  his  most 


68 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


terrible  servants.
The  hobbits  had  been  nearly  two  months  in  the  house  of 
Elrond,  and  November  had  gone  by  with  the  last  shreds  of 
autumn,  and  December  was  passing,  when  the  scouts  began 
to  return.
But  two  together  may  perhaps  find  wisdom.’ 

‘You  are  kind,’  answered  Frodo.
He  climbed  the  green  barrow  and  laid 
them  all  on  top  in  the  sunshine.
I  believe  that  mad  Baggins  is  off  again.
‘We  have  done  well,’  he  said.
I  don’t  look  it,  but  I  am  beginning 
to  feel  it  in  my  heart  of  hearts.
May 
Elbereth  protect  you!’ 

‘But  where  shall  I  find  courage?’  asked  Frodo.
‘But  it  is  perilous.’ 

‘Perilous  indeed,’  said  Aragorn,  ‘fair  and  perilous;  but  only 
evil  need  fear  it,  or  those  who  bring  some  evil  with  them.
At  that  moment  Sam  came  running  back  from  the 
edge  of  the  dell.
When  I’ve  seen  to  a  thing  or  two,  I’ll  come 
along  to  your  room,  if  you’re  willing.’ 

‘Certainly!’  said  Frodo;  but  his  heart  sank.
Be  able  to  rest  in  peace,  I  mean?’ 

‘He  felt  better  at  once,’  said  Gandalf.
It  is  not  of  the  Ring,  nor  of  us  others  that  I  am  thinking 
now,  but  of  you,  Gandalf.
But  we  cannot  enter  here,  for  the  gates 
do  not  look  northward.
I  told  Bilbo  often  that  such  rings  were 
better  left  unused;  but  he  resented  it,  and  soon  got  angry.
We  had  some  talk  last  night;  and  they 
seemed  to  know  you  were  going  away,  so  I  didn’t  see  the  use 
of  denying  it.
‘Then  about  a  year  ago  a  messenger  came  to  Dain,  but  not 
from  Moria  -  from  Mordor:  a  horseman  in  the  night,  who 
called  Dain  to  his  gate.
After  some  time  they  crossed  the  Water,  west  of  Hobbiton, 
by  a  narrow  plank-bridge.
Those  who  no  longer  wish  to  go  forward  may  remain  here, 
for  a  while.
Then  without  another  word 
he  turned  away  from  the  lights  and  voices  in  the  field  and 
tents,  and  followed  by  his  three  companions  went  round 
into  his  garden,  and  trotted  down  the  long  sloping  path.
Hey!
The  guests  were  not  disappointed:  they  had  a  very 
pleasant  feast,  in  fact  an  engrossing  entertainment:  rich, 
abundant,  varied,  and  prolonged.
What  are  we  to  do?
he  vanished.
When  ought  I  to 
start?’ 

Boromir  looked  in  surprise  at  Bilbo,  but  the  laughter  died 
on  his  lips  when  he  saw  that  all  the  others  regarded  the  old 
hobbit  with  grave  respect.
It  is  only  two  lines  of  a  verse  long  known  in  Elven-lore: 

Three  Rings  for  the  Elven-kings  under  the  sky, 

Seven  for  the  Dwarf-lords  in  their  halls  of  stone, 

Nine  for  Mortal  Men  doomed  to  die, 

One  for  the  Dark  Lord  on  his  dark  throne 
In  the  Land  of  Mordor  where  the  Shadows  lie.
You’ll  remember,  Mr.
‘It  is  told  that  she  had  a  house  built  in  the  branches  of  a 
tree  that  grew  near  the  falls;  for  that  was  the  custom  of  the 
Elves  of  Lorien,  to  dwell  in  the  trees,  and  maybe  it  is  so  still.
But  the  pursuers  were  close  behind.
They  started  off  in  a  southerly  direction.
They  would  soon  now  be  going  forward  into 
lands  wholly  strange  to  them,  and  beyond  all  but  the  most 
vague  and  distant  legends  of  the  Shire,  and  in  the  gathering 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS 


193 


twilight  they  longed  for  home.
‘Some  say  it  is  so  far,  and  some  say  other¬ 
wise.
‘Then  if  we  are  going  to  toil  through  bog  and  briar,  let’s 
go  now!’  said  Pippin.
‘We  have  passed  no  place  on  the  way  up  that  offered 
more  shelter  than  this  cliff- wall  we  are  under  now.’ 

‘Shelter!’  muttered  Sam.
How  much  are  you  prepared  to  carry  on  your 
backs?’ 

‘As  much  as  we  must,’  said  Pippin  with  a  sinking  heart, 
but  trying  to  show  that  he  was  tougher  than  he  looked  (or 
felt).
‘You  should  fear  the  many  eyes  of  the  servants  of  Sauron,’ 
he  said.
I  want  a  full  account;  and  most  of  all 
I  want  to  know  what  was  the  matter  with  old  Maggot,  and 
why  he  spoke  to  me  like  that.
‘Let  us  hope  to  hold  the  fort 
till  morning.’ 

‘Good  night  to  you,’  said  Nob,  and  went  off  to  take  his 
part  in  the  watch  on  the  doors.
I  am  sure  it 
was  not  for  our  benefit.
‘It  was  a  compliment,’  said  Merry  Brandybuck,  ‘and  so,  of 
course,  not  true.’ 

Then  they  went  round  the  hole,  and  evicted  three  young 
hobbits  (two  Boffins  and  a  Bolger)  who  were  knocking  holes 
in  the  walls  of  one  of  the  cellars.
‘Here!’  said  a  voice,  deep  and  cold,  that  seemed  to  come 
out  of  the  ground.
My  dear  People ,  began  Bilbo,  rising  in  his  place.
THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


321 


Of  these  words  we  could  understand  little,  and  we  spoke  to 
our  father,  Denethor,  Lord  of  Minas  Tirith,  wise  in  the  lore 
of  Gondor.
‘You  are  worn  with  sorrow  and 
much  toil.
There  was  a  cave  or 
rock-chamber  behind,  but  in  the  gloom  inside  nothing  could 
be  seen.
My 
heart  tells  me  that  Sauron  will  expect  us  to  take  the  western 
way,  when  he  learns  what  has  befallen.
‘You!’  he  cried.
Little 
did  I  know  where  the  chief  peril  lay!
It  was  hard  to  follow,  for  it 
went  many  ways,  and  I  was  at  a  loss.
He  could  work 
much  mischief  still,  if  he  were  free.
But  we  will  think  of  that  when  we  must.
It  bent  to  the  left,  curving  back  into 
its  eastward  line  as  it  rounded  the  feet  of  Bree-hill,  and  then 
it  began  to  run  swiftly  downwards  into  wooded  country.
I  fear  that  we  may  find  the  Ford  is  already  held 
against  us.’ 

While  Glorfindel  was  speaking  the  shades  of  evening  deep¬ 
ened.
‘Good-bye,  my  dear  Bilbo  -  until  our  next  meet¬ 
ing!’  he  said  softly  and  went  back  indoors.
He  gave  away  presents  to  all  and  sundry  -  the  latter  were 
those  who  went  out  again  by  a  back  way  and  came  in  again 
by  the  gate.
His  plans  are  far  from 
ripe,  I  think,  but  they  are  ripening.
I  won’t  give  my  Precious  away,  I  tell 
you.’  His  hand  strayed  to  the  hilt  of  his  small  sword.
‘Gildor  Inglorion  of  the  House  of  Finrod.
‘But  in  the  meantime  what  course 
am  I  to  take?’ 

‘Towards  danger;  but  not  too  rashly,  nor  too  straight,’ 
answered  the  wizard.
‘Get  up,  old  stone!’ 
he  said,  and  broke  his  stick  upon  the  stooping  troll.
When  winter  passed,  she  came  again, 

And  her  song  released  the  sudden  spring, 
Like  rising  lark,  and  falling  rain, 

And  melting  water  bubbling.
Chapter  4 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS 


In  the  morning  Frodo  woke  refreshed.
‘If  there  are  any  to  see,  then  I  at  least  am  revealed  to  them,’ 
he  said.
‘What?’  shouted  Tom  Bombadil,  leaping  up  in  the  air.
Or  perhaps  he  had 
been  ill?
Frodo  looked  at  them  in  wonder;  for  he  had  never  before 
seen  Elrond,  of  whom  so  many  tales  spoke;  and  as  they 
sat  upon  his  right  hand  and  his  left,  Glorfindel,  and  even 
Gandalf,  whom  he  thought  he  knew  so  well,  were  revealed 
as  lords  of  dignity  and  power.
It  did  not  at 
first  show  him  what  kind  of  a  place  he  was  in,  for  the  light 
seemed  to  be  coming  out  of  himself,  and  from  the  floor  beside 
him,  and  had  not  yet  reached  the  roof  or  wall.
I  tried  locking  it  up,  but  I  found 
I  couldn’t  rest  without  it  in  my  pocket.
‘Do  you  like  them  still,  now  you 
have  had  a  closer  view?’ 

‘They  seem  a  bit  above  my  likes  and  dislikes,  so  to  speak,’ 
answered  Sam  slowly.
The  trees  and  rocks 
about  him  seemed  shadowy  and  dim.
No 
blemish  or  sickness  or  deformity  could  be  seen  in  anything 
that  grew  upon  the  earth.
They  were  going  fast,  with  a  light  clippety-clippety-clip.
But  I  thought  you  knew  enough  Elvish  at  least  to  know  dun¬ 
adan:  Man  of  the  West,  Numenorean.
What  is 
he?
‘You’ll 
pardon  my  wondering  what  business  takes  you  away  east  of 
Bree!
There  was  no  sound  but  the  sound  of  their 
own  feet:  the  dull  stump  of  Gimli’s  dwarf-boots;  the  heavy 
tread  of  Boromir;  the  light  step  of  Legolas;  the  soft,  scarce- 
heard  patter  of  hobbit-feet;  and  in  the  rear  the  slow  firm 
footfalls  of  Aragorn  with  his  long  stride.
‘Yes,  you  are  all  safe  for  the  present.
Another  passed  through 
Aragorn’s  hood;  and  a  third  stood  fast  in  the  gunwale  of  the 
second  boat,  close  by  Merry’s  hand.
The  lights  went 
out.
‘I  suppose  we  haven’t  lost  more  than  two  days  by  my 
short  cut  through  the  Forest!
But  there  was  one  swarthy  Bree-lander,  who  stood 
looking  at  them  with  a  knowing  and  half-mocking  expression 
that  made  them  feel  very  uncomfortable.
Bilbo  has  learned  him  his  letters  - 
meaning  no  harm,  mark  you,  and  I  hope  no  harm  will  come 
of  it.
On  him  alone  is  any  charge  laid:  neither  to 
cast  away  the  Ring,  nor  to  deliver  it  to  any  servant  of  the 
Enemy  nor  indeed  to  let  any  handle  it,  save  members  of  the 
Company  and  the  Council,  and  only  then  in  gravest  need.
Do  not  touch  the 
water!’ 

Sam  climbed  up  on  the  foot  of  the  pedestal  and  leaned 
over  the  basin.
You  should  be  thankful.
And  may  I  sleep  deep,  and  forget  for  a 
while  my  grief!
Why  didn’t  I 
drive?’  he  thought,  as  he  usually  did  at  the  beginning  of  an 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


95 


expedition.
‘I  thought  I  heard  feet, 
and  I  thought  I  saw  a  light  -  like  eyes.
‘You  must  go  -  and 
therefore  we  must,  too.
He  read  the  will  carefully  and  snorted.
It  seemed  to 
them  that  they  did  little  but  eat  and  drink  and  rest,  and  walk 
among  the  trees;  and  it  was  enough.
Frodo  was  restless.
He  took  to  wandering 
further  afield  and  more  often  by  himself;  and  Merry  and 
his  other  friends  watched  him  anxiously.
Strider  sighed  and  paused  before  he  spoke  again.
‘Accident,  then.
Yet  it  will  not  be 
the  first  time  that  I  have  been  to  Moria.
He  is  one  of  my  order,  but  I 
had  not  seen  him  for  many  a  year.
Then  he  spurred  his  great  horse  right  at  me, 
and  I  jumped  out  of  the  way  only  just  in  time.
Off  East.
Their  new  weapons  they  hung  on  their  leather  belts  under 
their  jackets,  feeling  them  very  awkward,  and  wondering  if 
they  would  be  of  any  use.
Frodo  glanced  at  all  the  faces,  but  they  were  not  turned  to 
him.
Fragments  of  stone  lay  near.
The  little  upland  lawn  was 
open  upon  the  East  and  was  filled  now  with  the  early  sunlight.
Not  until  they  had  dwindled  into  the  distance,  north  and 
west,  and  the  sky  was  again  clear  would  Aragorn  rise.
Something  in  the 
way  that  he  said  this  made  an  impression.
They  are  valiant  men  and  keep  open  the  High 
Pass  and  the  Ford  of  Carrock.
The  legend 
of  Bilbo’s  wealth  was  now  too  firmly  fixed  in  the  minds  of 
the  younger  generation  of  hobbits.
Back  to  the  boats!
Do  you  really  know  it  all,  or  are  you  just 
guessing  still?’ 

Gandalf  looked  at  Frodo,  and  his  eyes  glinted.
Otherwise  he  obviously  thought  the  whole  thing  rather  above 


MANY  MEETINGS 


309 


my  head,  and  he  said  that  if  I  had  the  cheek  to  make  verses 
about  Earendil  in  the  house  of  Elrond,  it  was  my  affair.
May  it  be  a  light  to  you  in  dark 
places,  when  all  other  lights  go  out.
‘  “Worst  is  a  bad  word,”  I  said  to  him,  “and  I  hope  you  do 
not  live  to  see  it.”  But  amidst  his  talk  I  gathered  at  last  that 
Frodo  had  left  Hobbiton  less  than  a  week  before,  and  that  a 
black  horseman  had  come  to  the  Hill  the  same  evening.
They  were 
probably  following  the  very  track  that  Gandalf,  Bilbo,  and 
the  dwarves  had  used  many  years  before.
You  can  wear  it  under  your  outer  clothes.
There  was  a  wide  treeless  space  before  them,  running 
in  a  great  circle  and  bending  away  on  either  hand.
But  gathering  and 
catching  food  is  long  and  weary  work,  and  we  need  haste.
Before  them 
stretched  a  dark  still  lake.
For  the  Elves,  I  fear, 
it  will  prove  at  best  a  truce,  in  which  they  may  pass  to  the 
Sea  unhindered  and  leave  the  Middle-earth  for  ever.
Yet  it  is  not  so.
There  was 
no  sound  or  movement  in  the  night.
The  farmer  looked  at  him  closely.
Then  he  returned  to  the  brink  of  the  dell  and  looked 
down  at  the  others  laughing  and  talking.
Today  is  my  one  hundred 
and  eleventh  birthday:  I  am  eleventy-one  today!
‘This  is  poor  fare,’  they  said  to  the  hobbits;  ‘for  we  are 
lodging  in  the  greenwood  far  from  our  halls.
There 
were,  as  has  been  said,  many  young  hobbits  present.
Bilbo  backed  away  to  the  wall,  breathing  hard,  his  hand 
clutching  at  his  pocket.
There  were  five  tall 
figures:  two  standing  on  the  lip  of  the  dell,  three  advancing.
They  were  just  beginning  to  scramble  out, 
when  suddenly  they  heard  what  they  had  all  been  dreading: 
hoofs  on  the  road  ahead.
At  a  great 
height  above  the  ground  he  came  to  a  wide  talan,  like  the 
deck  of  a  great  ship.
‘But  the  dear  silly  old  hobbit,  he  ought  to 
know  that  he  hasn’t  got  to  ask.
‘I’ll  have  a  peep,  Lady,  if  you’re  willing.
Frodo  badly.
Rowan-trees  grew  about  it,  and  in 
the  midst  was  a  wide  flat  stone.
‘Welcome!’  she  said.
But  do  not  think  that  only 
by  singing  amid  the  trees,  nor  even  by  the  slender  arrows 
of  elven-bows,  is  this  land  of  Lothlorien  maintained  and 
defended  against  its  Enemy.
Baggins 
drew  attention  to  himself  this  evening,  to  say  no  more.
Down  a  long  flight  of  steps  the  Lady  went  into  the 
deep  green  hollow,  through  which  ran  murmuring  the  silver 
stream  that  issued  from  the  fountain  on  the  hill.
But  they  had  no 
chance  to  fly  yet.
‘It  will  be  my  turn  to  get  angry 
soon,’  he  said.
‘Elves!’  exclaimed  Sam  in  a  hoarse  whisper.
They  stood  silent,  reluctant  to  make  the 
final  parting,  and  only  slowly  became  aware  that  Tom  was 
wishing  them  farewell,  and  telling  them  to  have  good  heart 
and  to  ride  on  till  dark  without  halting.
There  was  no 
sound,  except  an  occasional  drip  of  moisture  falling  through 
the  still  leaves.
A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED 


133 


There  was  a  terrific  splash,  and  a  shout  of  Whoa!
The  Men  of  Westernesse 
came  to  their  aid.
‘That  is  but  a  part,  for  I  have 
forgotten  much.
‘Who  would?
He  looked  indisposed  -  to  see  Sackville-Bagginses  at 
any  rate;  and  he  stood  up,  fidgeting  with  something  in  his 
pocket.
‘If  we  are  going 
to  try  and  get  back  on  to  our  course,  we  must  cross  at  once 
and  bear  right.’ 

They  waded  the  stream,  and  hurried  over  a  wide  open 
space,  rush-grown  and  treeless,  on  the  further  side.
He  was  thankful  that  they  had  not  been 
caught  on  the  ground;  but  he  felt  that  the  trees  offered  little 
protection,  except  concealment.
The  icy 
touch  froze  his  bones,  and  he  remembered  no  more.
Less  flies!’ 

Frodo  did  not  like  the  sound  of  this.
The  others  were  discussing  this  very  question.
They  wondered  how  old  he  was,  and  where  he  had 
learned  all  this  lore.
I 
will  do  what  I  can  to  aid  you,  each  according  to  his  wish  and 
need,  but  especially  that  one  of  the  little  folk  who  bears  the 
burden.’ 

‘Your  quest  is  known  to  us,’  said  Galadriel,  looking  at 
Frodo.
The  Men  and  Dwarves  were  mostly  talking  of  distant 
events  and  telling  news  of  a  kind  that  was  becoming  only  too 
familiar.
Then  there  are  four  lines  smeared  so  that  I  can  only  read 
went  5  days  ago.
It  will  take  a  good  deal  of 
preparation.’ 

‘The  answer  to  the  second  question,’  said  Merry,  ‘is  that 
we  could  get  off  in  an  hour.
They  bore  no  lights,  yet  as  they 
walked  a  shimmer,  like  the  light  of  the  moon  above  the  rim 
of  the  hills  before  it  rises,  seemed  to  fall  about  their  feet.
‘Come  back!
There  was  a  great 
draught  of  warmer  air  behind  them,  and  before  them  the 
darkness  was  cold  on  their  faces.
Frodo 
could  understand  little  of  what  was  said,  for  the  speech  that 
the  Silvan  folk  east  of  the  mountains  used  among  themselves 
was  unlike  that  of  the  West.
the  cow  jumped  over  the  Moon, 

And  the  little  dog  laughed  to  see  such  fun, 

And  the  Saturday  dish  went  off  at  a  run 
with  the  silver  Sunday  spoon.
It  had  been  built 
long  ago  when  the  traffic  on  the  roads  had  been  far  greater.
The  gathering  was  large  and  mixed,  as  Frodo  discovered, 
when  his  eyes  got  used  to  the  light.
Then  I  came 
back  here,  and  here  I  have  been.
I  would  dearly  love  to  see  them.
‘So  it  is  now:  the  Nine  he  has  gathered  to  himself;  the 
Seven  also,  or  else  they  are  destroyed.
But  he  may 
play  a  part  yet  that  neither  he  nor  Sauron  have  foreseen.
Fool!
But  my  time  is  coming.
Very  queer 
he  was,  and  as  soon  as  I  had  roused  him,  he  got  up  and  ran 
back  here  like  a  hare.’ 

‘I  am  afraid  that’s  true,’  said  Merry,  ‘though  I  don’t  know 
what  I  said.
fear!
What  then  is  this  one  that  he 
desires  so  much?
All  seemed  quiet 
and  still,  but  Frodo  felt  a  cold  dread  creeping  over  his  heart, 
now  that  Strider  was  no  longer  speaking.
Merry  led  the  pony  over  a  gangway  on  to  the  ferry,  and 
the  others  followed.
‘Enough,  enough!’  cried  Gimli.
You  don’t  belong  here;  you’re  no  Baggins  -  you  -  you’re 
a  Brandybuck!’ 

‘Did  you  hear  that,  Merry?
Do  whatever  you  can  for  him,  and  I’ll  be  grateful, 
he  says.
They  began 
by  offering  him  bad  bargain-prices  (as  between  friends)  for 
various  valuable  and  unlabelled  things.
What  I  have  told  you  is  what  Gollum  was 
willing  to  tell  -  though  not,  of  course,  in  the  way  I  have 
reported  it.
Making  out  Gollum’s 
part,  and  fitting  it  into  the  gap  in  the  history,  required  some 
thought.
‘Anyway  we  want  to  see 
him  and  we  mean  to  see  him.
Even  if  there  were 
no  lake,  we  could  not  get  our  baggage -pony  up  this  stair.’ 

‘But  in  any  case  we  cannot  take  the  poor  beast  into  the 
Mines,’  said  Gandalf.
Tom  Bombadil,  Tom  Bombadillo!
‘Hullo,  Sam!’  said  Frodo.
The  dusk  deepened,  and  the 
last  gleams  of  the  sunset  were  veiled  in  cloud.
‘He  is  indisposed,’  he  said.
Though  he  kept  himself  very 
quiet  and  did  not  go  about  by  day,  it  was  well  known  that  he 
was  ‘hiding  up  in  the  Bag  End’.
The  remainder  of  the  page 
is  so  blurred  that  I  can  hardly  make  anything  out,  but  I  think 
I  can  read  we  have  barred  the  gates,  and  then  can  hold  them 
long  if  and  then  perhaps  horrible  and  suffer.
Autumn  was  well  under  way  before  Frodo  began  to  worry 
about  Gandalf  again.
Elrond’s  folk  met  them,  carrying  you  slowly  towards 
Rivendell.’ 

‘Who  made  the  flood?’  asked  Frodo.
Mr.
322 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Behold  Isildur’s  Bane!’  said  Elrond.
‘Snow’s 
all  right  on  a  fine  morning,  but  I  like  to  be  in  bed  while  it’s 
falling.
Great  shadows  sprang  up  and  fled, 
and  for  a  second  they  saw  a  vast  roof  far  above  their  heads 
upheld  by  many  mighty  pillars  hewn  of  stone.
‘For  otherwise 
I  shall  follow  the  Company.’ 

‘Let  it  be  so  then.
The  black  horses  were  filled  with  madness,  and  leaping 
forward  in  terror  they  bore  their  riders  into  the  rushing  flood.
Above  her  brow  her  head  was  covered  with  a  cap  of  silver 
lace  netted  with  small  gems,  glittering  white;  but  her  soft  grey 
raiment  had  no  ornament  save  a  girdle  of  leaves  wrought  in 
silver.
‘That  is  Weathertop,’  said  Strider.
Frodo  fell  forward  over  Merry,  and  Merry’s  face  felt  cold.
Frodo  thought 
that  he  heard  a  faint  hiss  as  of  venomous  breath  and  felt  a 
thin  piercing  chill.
Many 
had  gone  east  and  south;  and  some  of  these  had  crossed  the 
Mountains  and  entered  Mirkwood,  while  others  had  climbed 
the  pass  at  the  sources  of  the  Gladden  River,  and  had  come 
down  into  Wilderland  and  over  the  Gladden  Fields  and  so  at 
length  had  reached  the  old  home  of  Radagast  at  Rhosgobel.
They  galloped  their 
ponies  over  the  last  furlongs,  and  halted  under  the  long 
shadows  of  the  trees.
‘Also,’  said  Haldir,  ‘they  bring  me  a  message  from  the  Lord 
and  Lady  of  the  Galadhrim.
‘Let  us  sit  and  rest  and  have  something  to  eat,  here  on  the 
landing,  since  we  can’t  find  a  dining-room!’  said  Frodo.
‘I  am  troubled,  for  the  first  time  since  I  have  known  him.
The  Lord  Sauron  the  Great,  so  he 
said,  wished  for  our  friendship.
They  fool  about  with  boats  on  that  big 
river  -  and  that  isn’t  natural.
In  the  stony  wall  there  was  a  door 
hanging  crookedly  ajar  upon  one  great  hinge.
In  the  meanwhile,  do  take  care,  and  don’t  let  out 
any  hint  of  where  you  are  going!
‘You  may  not  remember  him,  but  he  used 
to  live  at  Brandy  Hall.’  At  the  name  Baggins  the  farmer 
started,  and  gave  Frodo  a  sharp  glance.
‘But  now  the  world  is  changing  once  again.
But  I  am  a 
stranger  in  these  parts.
The 
trees  drew  close  again  on  either  side,  and  they  could  no  longer 
see  far  ahead.
‘My  dear  Gandalf!
Yet 
Frodo  began  to  hear,  or  to  imagine  that  he  heard,  something 
else:  like  the  faint  fall  of  soft  bare  feet.
So  black  were  they  that  they  seemed  like 
black  holes  in  the  deep  shade  behind  them.
‘I  knew  I’d  want  it,  if  I  hadn’t  got  it!’ 

As  these  dangers  became  more  frequent  their  march 
became  slower.
In  the 
west  they  could  not  make  out  either  the  line  of  the  Hedge  or 
the  valley  of  the  Brandywine  beyond  it.
-  and  went  on  down  the  old  road  beside  the  river.
‘It  would  be  folly  to  throw  lives 
away,  I  mean,’  he  ended.
‘Fair  lady  Goldberry!’  he  said  again.
Bombadil  is  talking!’  He 
then  seized  Merry’s  feet  and  drew  him  out  of  the  suddenly 
widening  crack.
The  leaves  hung  silently  again  on  stiff  branches.
‘If  you  had  really 
started  this  affair,  you  might  be  expected  to  finish  it.
We  will 
seek  the  hidden  doors  together.
Most  of  these  he  made  into  a 
pile  that  glistered  and  sparkled  on  the  grass.
Sam  never  quite  trusted  him,  I  think, 
not  at  any  rate  until  we  met  Glorfindel.’ 

Gandalf  smiled.
that  trailed  off  into  a  long  wail  suddenly  cut 
short.
All  I  ask  in  return  is:  take  as  much  care 
of  yourself  as  you  can,  and  bring  back  all  the  news  you  can, 
and  any  old  songs  and  tales  you  can  come  by.
In  evil  hands 
it  might  have  done  great  evil.
His  broad  flat  face  was  swart,  his  eyes  were  like  coals, 
and  his  tongue  was  red;  he  wielded  a  great  spear.
‘There’s  so  much  water  in  the  air  that  I’m  coming  into  the 
kitchen  to  finish,’  he  said.
The  Brown  Lands  rose  into  bleak  wolds,  over 
which  flowed  a  chill  air  from  the  East.
Do  not  try!
None  of  the 
Company,  I  guess,  will  wish  to  swim  this  gloomy  water  at  the 
end  of  the  day.
‘I  am  sick  of  questions  and  curiosity 
about  my  doings,  I  suppose,’  he  thought.
Bill  Ferny’s  treatment  must 
have  been  very  hard  for  the  journey  in  the  wild  to  seem  so 
much  better  than  its  former  life.
There  were  no  paths  in  the  under¬ 
growth,  and  they  did  not  get  on  very  fast.
Hear!’  they  shouted,  and  kept  on  repeating  it  in  chorus, 
seeming  reluctant  to  follow  their  own  advice.
Baggins  now,  that  I  work  for.
Have  your  weapons  close  to 
hand!’ 

Sam  sat  tapping  the  hilt  of  his  sword  as  if  he  were  counting 
on  his  fingers,  and  looking  up  at  the  sky.
It  was  by  the  devices  of  Saruman  that  we  drove  him  from 
Dol  Guldur.
A  hunted  man  sometimes  wearies  of  distrust  and 
longs  for  friendship.
Trees  with  old  and 
twisted  roots  hung  over  cliffs,  and  piled  up  behind  into 
mounting  slopes  of  pine-wood.
Even  now  he  looked  at  the  stone  trolls  with  sus¬ 
picion,  wondering  if  some  magic  might  not  suddenly  bring 
them  to  life  again.
102 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Tomorrow  we  may  come  this  way 
And  take  the  hidden  paths  that  run 
Towards  the  Moon  or  to  the  Sun.
A  hardly  perceptible  shiver  ran  through 
the  stem  and  up  into  the  branches;  the  leaves  rustled  and 
whispered,  but  with  a  sound  now  of  faint  and  far-off  laughter.
‘  “How  far  can  you  bear  me?”  I  said  to  Gwaihir.
Anyone  would  have  thought  you  had  a  guilty 
conscience.
A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


247 


‘I  wonder  if  old  Gandalf  has  been  here,’  he  said  to  Pippin.
Pippin  was  sitting  on  his  pack  in  the  porch.
‘If  it  don’t  let  them  go,  I’ll  have  it  down,  if 
I  have  to  gnaw  it.’  He  ran  to  the  ponies  and  before  long  came 
back  with  two  tinder-boxes  and  a  hatchet.
‘That 
wouldn’t  do  at  all!
When  the  battle  was  over,  we  found  that  Gollum  was  gone, 
and  his  guards  were  slain  or  taken.
‘I  am 
Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn;  and  if  by  life  or  death  I  can  save 
you,  I  will.’ 

There  was  a  long  silence.
‘The  agreement  was 
made  without  my  consent,’  he  said.
It  was 
marked  by  two  tall  white  posts  that  suddenly  loomed  up  on 
their  right.
‘Never  has  such  a  thing  happened  in  my  time!’  he  cried, 
raising  his  hands  in  horror.
‘  “The  time  of  my  thought  is  my  own  to  spend,”  answered 
Dain.
Fear  not!
I  could  have 
brought  the  thing  here  myself  long  ago  without  so  much 
trouble.
But  they  were  now  hungry,  and  the  sun 
was  still  at  the  fearless  noon;  so  they  set  their  backs  against 
the  east  side  of  the  stone.
Why  have  you  drawn 
your  sword?’ 

‘Gollum,’  answered  Frodo.
As 
Frodo  left  the  barrow  for  the  last  time  he  thought  he  saw  a 
severed  hand  wriggling  still,  like  a  wounded  spider,  in  a  heap 
of  fallen  earth.
His  longing  for  the  Ring  proved  stronger  than  his  fear  of 
the  Ores,  or  even  of  the  light.
They  became  an  evil  people,  as  legends  tell,  for  they  fell 
under  the  shadow  of  Angmar.
‘So  much  has 
happened  this  day  and  we  have  such  need  of  haste,  that  I 
have  forgotten  that  you  were  hurt;  and  Sam  too.
It  might  be  that  he  had  found  some  weapons  that 
would  drive  back  the  Nine.
His 
followers  fled  howling,  as  Boromir  and  Aragorn  sprang  at 
them.
Their  great  grey  trunks  were  of  mighty 
girth,  but  their  height  could  not  be  guessed.
I  only  wished  to  claim  the  treasure 
as  my  very  own  in  those  days,  and  to  be  rid  of  the  name  of 
thief  that  was  put  on  me.
Yet  even  as  I  write  it  is  cooled,  and  it 
seemeth  to  shrink,  though  it  loseth  neither  its  beauty  nor  its 
shape.
‘Can  you  see  anything  now?’ 

The  Moon  now  shone  upon  the  grey  face  of  the  rock;  but 
they  could  see  nothing  else  for  a  while.
All  of  it  would  hardly  satisfy  a  rogue,  and  he  could  not 
spare  any  of  it.
There  they  found  a  shelving  shore,  and  they 
drew  the  boat  out,  high  above  the  water,  and  hid  it  as  well  as 
they  could  behind  a  great  boulder.
‘I  need  smoke!
I  suppose  he  was  lurking  in 
Moria,  and  picked  up  our  trail  then;  but  I  hoped  that  our 
stay  in  Lorien  would  throw  him  off  the  scent  again.
On  the  further  bank  we  can  rest,  and  the  sound  of 
the  falling  water  may  bring  us  sleep  and  forgetfulness  of 
grief.’ 

One  by  one  they  climbed  down  and  followed  Legolas.
Presently,  with 
a  wave  of  his  hand  and  a  nod,  he  invited  Frodo  to  come  over 
and  sit  by  him.
It  was  no  plan  of  mine,  though  I  was 
waiting  for  you.
There  was  a 
tumult  of  many  voices  far  away,  cursing  and  wailing  in  the 
darkness,  and  then  silence.
And  behold!
Not  till  the  spring  comes  and  the 
new  green  opens  do  they  fall,  and  then  the  boughs  are  laden 
with  yellow  flowers;  and  the  floor  of  the  wood  is  golden,  and 
golden  is  the  roof,  and  its  pillars  are  of  silver,  for  the  bark  of 
the  trees  is  smooth  and  grey.
Or  we 
shall  be  driven  on  the  shoals.’  Even  as  he  spoke  Frodo  felt 
the  keel  beneath  him  grate  upon  stone.
I  do  not  know!
‘Bilbo  gave  it  all  away.
Who  made  the  track,  do  you  suppose,  and  why?
And  see  that  Sam  Gamgee 
does  not  talk.
On  the  other  side  the 
meads  had  become  rolling  downs  of  withered  grass  amidst  a 
land  of  fen  and  tussock.
The  other  three  went  on.
The  sound  was  coming  towards 
them.
For  you  do  not  yet  know  the 
strength  of  your  hearts,  and  you  cannot  foresee  what  each 
may  meet  upon  the  road.’ 

‘Faithless  is  he  that  says  farewell  when  the  road  darkens,’ 
said  Gimli.
They  brandished  spears  and  scimitars  which  shone  red  as 
blood  in  the  firelight.
What  shall  now  become 
of  our  Company  that  has  travelled  so  far  in  fellowship?
‘It  went  off  better  than  I  expected.
So  still  our  songs  in  Mirkwood 


436  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

say.
I  have  bidden  him  to  be  present,  for  here  his 
questions  will  be  answered.’ 

Not  all  that  was  spoken  and  debated  in  the  Council  need 
now  be  told.
Why  did  you  do 
that?
‘A  very  nice  well-spoken  gentlehobbit  is  Mr.
Into  the  enve¬ 
lope  he  slipped  his  golden  ring,  and  its  fine  chain,  and  then 
sealed  it,  and  addressed  it  to  Frodo.
What  is  his  counsel  -  if  he  knows  the  things 
that  we  have  heard?’ 

‘The  questions  that  you  ask,  Galdor,  are  bound  together,’ 
said  Elrond.
‘Into  the  gateway!
But  this  I  will  say  to  you:  your 
Quest  stands  upon  the  edge  of  a  knife.
Now  let  the  fun  begin!
We  must  have  reached  the  Ford  by  the 
twentieth.’ 

‘You  have  talked  and  reckoned  more  than  is  good  for  you,’ 
said  Gandalf.
No  voice  of  bird  broke  the  silence.
Legolas  watched  them  for  a  while  with  a  smile  upon  his 
lips,  and  then  he  turned  to  the  others.
‘There  must  have  been  a  mighty  crowd  of  dwarves  here  at 
one  time,’  said  Sam;  ‘and  every  one  of  them  busier  than 
badgers  for  five  hundred  years  to  make  all  this,  and  most  in 
hard  rock  too!
‘Farewell,’  he  said.
The  dark 
line  they  had  seen  was  not  a  line  of  trees  but  a  line  of  bushes 
growing  on  the  edge  of  a  deep  dike  with  a  steep  wall  on  the 
further  side.
Not  even  the  anvils  and  furnaces  of  the 
Dwarves  could  do  that.
There  were  fortresses  on  the  heights.
Sam 
viewed  the  hollow  with  great  dislike,  now  that  he  had  heard 
news  of  their  enemies  on  the  Road,  only  a  few  miles  away.
I  knew  at  last  that  something 


64 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


dark  and  deadly  was  at  work.
He  bitterly  regretted  his  foolishness, 
and  reproached  himself  for  weakness  of  will;  for  he  now 
perceived  that  in  putting  on  the  Ring  he  obeyed  not  his 
own  desire  but  the  commanding  wish  of  his  enemies.
THE  BRIDGE  OF  KHAZAD-DUM  429 

‘Lead  the  way,  Gimli!’  he  said.
There  the  Entwash  flows  in  by  many 
mouths  from  the  Forest  of  Fangorn  in  the  west.
Let  us  hope  we 
shall  get  some  rest  without  further  trouble.
May  I  stay  now  and  talk  for  a 
while,  since  I  have  found  you?
Come  ahead 
with  me!
They  say  I  am  a 
nuisance  and  a  disturber  of  the  peace.
He  was  riding  a  pony,  and  a  scarf  was  swathed  round 
his  neck  and  over  his  chin  to  keep  out  the  fog.
Then 
there’s  a  travelling  company  of  dwarves  going  West  come  in 
this  evening.
It 
might  well  prove  impossible.
‘It 
was  both  a  shadow  and  a  flame,  strong  and  terrible.’ 

‘It  was  a  Balrog  of  Morgoth,’  said  Legolas;  ‘of  all  elf-banes 
the  most  deadly,  save  the  One  who  sits  in  the  Dark  Tower.’ 

‘Indeed  I  saw  upon  the  bridge  that  which  haunts  our  dark¬ 
est  dreams,  I  saw  Durin’s  Bane,’  said  Gimli  in  a  low  voice, 
and  dread  was  in  his  eyes.
And  you  can  trust  us  to 
keep  any  secret  of  yours  -  closer  than  you  keep  it  yourself.
After  a  long  slow  moment  he  heard 
plain,  but  far  away,  as  if  it  was  coming  down  through  the 
ground  or  through  thick  walls,  an  answering  voice  singing: 

Old  Tom  Bombadil  is  a  merry  fellow, 

Bright  blue  his  jacket  is,  and  his  boots  are  yellow.
When  they  had  sung  this  altogether  after  him,  he  clapped 
them  each  on  the  shoulder  with  a  laugh,  and  taking  candles 
led  them  back  to  their  bedroom.
Take  it  and  go  forth  to 
victory!’ 

‘Alas,  no,’  said  Elrond.
The  lies  were  too  much  alike  for  my  comfort.
‘You  would 
have  been,  too,  if  you  had  been  chased  for  two  days  by  Black 
Riders.’ 


134 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘And  what  are  they?’ 

‘Black  figures  riding  on  black  horses,’  answered  Pippin.
Would  it  be  safe 
to  wait  one  day  for  Gandalf?’ 

‘That  all  depends  on  what  you  think  the  Riders  would  do, 
if  they  found  you  here,’  answered  Merry.
I  thought  I  was  drowning,  with  my  friends  and 
enemies  and  all.
But  your 
safety  has  passed.
The  hunt  is  up!
‘I  wonder  where  he  is.
Very  mighty  Rings,  it  is  said.
I  say  again:  keep 
it  safe,  and  keep  it  secret!
My  brothers, 
Rumil  and  Orophin,  speak  little  of  your  tongue.
He  appeared  already  to  know  much  about  them  and  all 
their  families,  and  indeed  to  know  much  of  all  the  history 
and  doings  of  the  Shire  down  from  days  hardly  remembered 
among  the  hobbits  themselves.
‘Hadn’t  we  better  clear  out  quick,  Mr.
I  hope  he  will  be  happy,  when  he 
gets  used  to  being  on  his  own.
With  his  last  failing  senses  Frodo  heard  cries,  and  it  seemed 
to  him  that  he  saw,  beyond  the  Riders  that  hesitated  on  the 
shore,  a  shining  figure  of  white  light;  and  behind  it  ran  small 
shadowy  forms  waving  flames,  that  flared  red  in  the  grey  mist 
that  was  falling  over  the  world.
‘Well,  well!’  he  said.
Leave  your  game  and  sit  down  beside 
me!
There  was  almost 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


39 


silence,  and  one  or  two  of  the  Tooks  pricked  up  their  ears.
THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


359 


‘The  Company  of  the  Ring  shall  be  Nine;  and  the  Nine 
Walkers  shall  be  set  against  the  Nine  Riders  that  are  evil.
If  they  catch  me  here,  I  shall 
have  to  argue  and  explain,  and  I  shall  never  have  the  heart 
or  the  chance  to  get  off.
I  went  to  pieces.
But  if  you  wish  to 
destroy  the  armed  might  of  the  Dark  Lord,  then  it  is  folly  to 
go  without  force  into  his  domain;  and  folly  to  throw  away.’ 
He  paused  suddenly,  as  if  he  had  become  aware  that  he  was 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


481 


speaking  his  thoughts  aloud.
Maybe  the  paths  that  you  each  shall  tread  are 
already  laid  before  your  feet,  though  you  do  not  see  them.
Come  on,  lads!’ 

Frodo  and  Sam  stopped  dead,  but  Pippin  walked  on  a  few 
paces.
For  the  folk 
of  Arnor  dwindled,  and  their  foes  devoured  them,  and  their 
lordship  passed,  leaving  only  green  mounds  in  the  grassy 
hills.
Then  slowly  they  saw  the  forms  of  the  encircling 
mountains  mirrored  in  a  profound  blue,  and  the  peaks  were 
like  plumes  of  white  flame  above  them;  beyond  there  was  a 
space  of  sky.
They  could  now  see  their  way:  in  front 
the  road  sloped  down  swiftly,  and  some  way  ahead  there 
stood  a  low  archway;  through  it  the  growing  light  came.
‘I  wonder  what  sort 
of  dreams  they  are  having.’ 

They  went  round  to  the  other  side  of  the  tree,  and  then 
Sam  understood  the  click  that  he  had  heard.
It  will  be  safe  enough  there,  till  Frodo  comes.
‘The  road  may  lead  to  Moria,  but  how  can  we  hope  that  it 
will  lead  through  Moria?’  said  Aragorn  darkly.
Sam  shrank  to  Frodo’s  side.
There  are  ores  and  trolls,  there  are  wargs  and 
werewolves;  and  there  have  been  and  still  are  many  Men, 
warriors  and  kings,  that  walk  alive  under  the  Sun,  and  yet  are 
under  his  sway.
All  then  is 
well.
The  most  inquisitive  and  curious-minded  of  that 
family  was  called  Smeagol.
‘And  after  these  words  Isildur  described  the  Ring,  such  as  he 
found  it.
‘  “At  the  worst,”  said  he,  “our  Enemy  knows  that  we  have 
it  not,  and  that  it  still  is  lost.
He  ducked  too  late,  and  curses  came  from 
behind  the  hedge.
What  are  you  afraid  of?’ 

‘I  am  not  certain,  so  I  will  say  no  more.
Chapter  io 


STRIDER 


Frodo,  Pippin,  and  Sam  made  their  way  back  to  the  parlour.
The  evening  star  had 
risen  and  was  shining  with  white  fire  above  the  western 
woods.
‘Coming,  Mr.
‘All  is  well,’  said  Aragorn,  as  he  clambered  down  the  hank.
Frodo  halted  and  looked  out  over  the  River,  far  below  him, 
to  Tol  Brandir  and  the  birds  wheeling  in  the  great  gulf  of  air 
between  him  and  the  untrodden  isle.
The  others  were  in  file 
behind,  and  Legolas  whose  eyes  were  keen  was  the  rearguard.
But  be  wary,  and  handle  it  as  little 
as  you  may!
Round  the  fire  they  sat,  and  those  that  were  not  on  guard 
dozed  uneasily.
The  next  line  or  two  I 
cannot  read.
We  can’t  start  until  we 
have  found  out  about  the  Riders.’ 

‘I  thought  they  were  all  destroyed  in  the  flood,’  said  Merry.
‘And  I 
am  not  one  either.
I  could  only  watch  and  wait.
Sam  was 
snoring  at  his  side  long  before  he  himself  closed  his  eyes.
‘There,  Sam!
I  hope  you’ll  be 
comfortable.
‘Yes  I  do!’  replied  Mugwort.
Their  dark  leaves  shone  and 
their  berries  glowed  red  in  the  light  of  the  rising  sun.
There  you  can  stay  the  night,  and 
afterwards  the  morning  will  speed  you  upon  your  way.
Then  she  let  her  hand  fall,  and  the  light  faded, 
and  suddenly  she  laughed  again,  and  lo!
‘The  Ring!
He’s  moved  to 
Bucklebury  or  some  such  place,  away  down  yonder.
‘It  is  a  choice  between  defending  a 
strong  place  and  walking  openly  into  the  arms  of  death.
It  is  very  pleasant  just  to  rest.
That  interested  me  so  much  that  I  followed  them  here.
Keep  the 
east  door  ajar!
It  opened  on  to 
the  gardens  and  looked  south  across  the  ravine  of  the 
Bruinen.
One  of  them  let  fall 
a  hobbit-cloak  on  the  step,  as  he  ran.
Each  year  the  Bagginses  had 
given  very  lively  combined  birthday-parties  at  Bag  End;  but 
now  it  was  understood  that  something  quite  exceptional 
was  being  planned  for  that  autumn.
I  cannot  allow  him  to  pass.’ 

‘But  he  is  from  the  Lonely  Mountain,  one  of  Dain’s  trusty 
people,  and  friendly  to  Elrond,’  said  Frodo.
I  have  thought  of  a  nice  ending  for  it:  and  he  lived 
happily  ever  after  to  the  end  of  his  days’ 

Gandalf  laughed.
He  seemed  to  be  asleep.
Then  they  all  fell  silent,  and  one 
by  one  the  hobbits  dropped  off  to  sleep.
A  dreary  place:  but  it 
seemed  a  charming  and  cheerful  garden  after  the  close  Forest.
And  Mr.
When  they  reached  the  bottom  it  was  so  chill  that 
they  halted  and  got  out  cloaks  and  hoods,  which  soon  became 
bedewed  with  grey  drops.
‘I  would  rather  see  him  than  all  the 
towers  and  palaces  in  the  world.’ 

At  length  the  feast  came  to  an  end.
By  nightfall  they  were  all 
soaked,  and  their  camp  was  cheerless,  for  they  could  not  get 
any  fire  to  burn.
Not  all  his  servants  and  chattels 


290  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

are  wraiths!
‘I  will  go  with  Sam.’ 

‘Then  I  cannot  help  you  much,  not  even  with  counsel,’ 
said  Elrond.
We  were  both  right!
At  the  left  of  this  high  range  rose  three 
peaks;  the  tallest  and  nearest  stood  up  like  a  tooth  tipped  with 


368 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


snow;  its  great,  bare,  northern  precipice  was  still  largely  in 
the  shadow,  but  where  the  sunlight  slanted  upon  it,  it  glowed 
red.
‘I  don’t  think  you  introduced  him?’ 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY  205 

‘Him?’  said  the  landlord  in  an  answering  whisper,  cocking 
an  eye  without  turning  his  head.
But  fat  men  who  sell  ale  have  many  calls 
to  answer;  and  the  power  of  Sauron  is  still  less  than  fear 
makes  it.
We  will  go  forward  a  short  way,  until  the 
trees  are  all  about  us,  and  then  we  will  turn  aside  from  the 
path  and  seek  a  place  to  rest  in.’ 

He  stepped  forward;  but  Boromir  stood  irresolute  and  did 
not  follow.
‘I  am  one  good  reason.
There  is  a  dry  fir-wood  just  ahead,  if  I  remember 
rightly.’  Sam  knew  the  land  well  within  twenty  miles  of 
Hobbiton,  but  that  was  the  limit  of  his  geography.
All  were  well  furnished  by  Elrond  with  thick  warm  clothes, 
and  they  had  jackets  and  cloaks  lined  with  fur.
THE  GREAT  RIVER 


499 


‘That’s  when  I  sat  right  up  and  rubbed  my  eyes,  meaning 
to  give  a  shout,  if  it  was  still  there  when  I  had  rubbed  the 
drowse  out  of  my  head.
The  sound 
was  ominous.
‘As  a  matter  of  fact  it  was  all 
mine.
Away  in  the  south  Frodo  could  see  the  dim  shapes  of  lofty 
mountains  that  seemed  now  to  stand  across  the  path  that  the 
Company  was  taking.
But  both  are  beyond  our  power.
‘There  is  indeed  a  wide  waste  of  time  between  the  River 


326 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


and  the  Mountain,  between  the  loss  and  the  finding.
Legolas  had 
loosed  his  bow.
The  hobbits  sprang  to  their  feet  in  alarm,  and  ran  to  the 
western  rim.
They  stopped,  and  when  the  echoes  had  died  away,  they 
were  repeated:  tap-tom ,  tom-tap ,  tap-tap,  tom.
Bringing 
up  young  hobbits  took  a  lot  of  provender.
‘Cling  to  my  back!
The  Forest  was  hidden  under  a  fog.
They’ve  a  right  to  live,  same  as  other  folk,’ 
he  said  loudly.
The  night  was  old,  and  westward  the  waning  moon  was 
setting,  gleaming  fitfully  through  the  breaking  clouds.
There  was  loud  and  long  applause.
‘Goldberry!’  he  cried.
For  a  second  the  hobbits  had  a  vision,  both  comical 
and  alarming,  of  his  bright  blue  eye  gleaming  through  a  circle 
of  gold.
For  I  am  Saruman 
the  Wise,  Saruman  Ring-maker,  Saruman  of  Many  Colours!” 

‘I  looked  then  and  saw  that  his  robes,  which  had  seemed 
white,  were  not  so,  but  were  woven  of  all  colours,  and  if  he 
moved  they  shimmered  and  changed  hue  so  that  the  eye  was 
bewildered.
Gathering  dust  still  in  Michel  Delving  Mathom-house,  I 
suppose.’ 

‘What?’  cried  Gimli,  startled  out  of  his  silence.
‘Nothing!
‘Why  didn’t  you  speak  up  before?’ 

‘I  have  only  just  remembered,  sir.
“The  Nine  are  abroad  again.
I  am  sorry:  sorry  you  have  come  in  for  this  burden; 
sorry  about  everything.
The  voices 
wailed  and  the  wolves  yammered.
We’ll  halt  at  the  first  likely  spot.’ 

‘The  wind’s  in  the  West,’  said  Sam.
Every  item  of  news  from  the  Shire  that  Frodo  could  tell  - 
aided  and  corrected  now  and  again  by  Sam  -  was  of  the 
greatest  interest  to  him,  from  the  felling  of  the  least  tree  to 
the  pranks  of  the  smallest  child  in  Hobbiton.
Most  likely  neither  of  us  will  come  back.’ 

‘If  you  don’t  come  back,  sir,  then  I  shan’t,  that’s  certain,’ 
said  Sam.
So  far  they  had 
not  met  a  soul  on  the  road.
Nowhere  else  in  the  world  was  this 
peculiar  (but  excellent)  arrangement  to  be  found.
If  they  had 
had  no  larger  companions  the  hobbits  would  soon  have  been 
entirely  buried.
‘That  is  the  warning  bell  for  the  Council  of  Elrond,’  cried 
Gandalf.
Sarn  Gebir  must  be  close  at  hand  already.’ 

With  great  efforts  they  checked  the  boats  and  slowly 
brought  them  about;  but  at  first  they  could  make  only  small 
headway  against  the  current,  and  all  the  time  they  were 
carried  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  eastern  bank.
His  family 
came  from  the  Eastfarthing,  from  Budgeford  in  Bridgefields 
in  fact,  but  he  had  never  been  over  the  Brandywine  Bridge.
But  Frodo,  without 
any  clear  idea  of  why  he  did  so,  or  what  he  hoped  for,  ran 
along  the  path  crying  help!
They  said  farewell  to  Nob  and  Bob,  and  took  leave  of  Mr.
Frodo 
was  hardly  less  terrified  than  his  companions;  he  was  quaking 
as  if  he  was  bitter  cold,  but  his  terror  was  swallowed  up  in  a 
sudden  temptation  to  put  on  the  Ring.
‘The  first  thing  for  the  Company  to  do  is  to  climb  up  by  the 
main  path  and  see  where  that  will  lead  us.
After  a  few  remarks  about  the  weather  and  the  agricultural 
prospects  (which  were  no  worse  than  usual),  Farmer  Maggot 
put  down  his  mug  and  looked  at  them  all  in  turn.
‘And 
keep  your  packs  on  as  long  as  you  can:  we  may  get  a  chance 
to  cut  our  way  out  yet.’ 

‘No!’  said  Gandalf.
Frodo  left  an 
orphan  and  stranded,  as  you  might  say,  among  those  queer 
Bucklanders,  being  brought  up  anyhow  in  Brandy  Hall.
The  light  fell  upon  the  floor,  and  upon 
the  faces  of  the  three  hobbits  lying  beside  Frodo.
There 
was  nothing  to  be  seen.
Now  indeed  we  miss 
Gandalf  most.’ 

‘Grievous  is  our  loss,’  said  Legolas.
The  Ring  of  Power?
Worst  of  all,  it  might  have  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  the  Enemy.
Butterbur  turning  pale;  the  name  evi¬ 
dently  was  known  to  him.
‘I  am  not  a  Black  Rider,  Sam,’  he  said  gently,  ‘nor  in  league 
with  them.
‘And  the  Star  of  the  House  of  Feanor,’  said  Gandalf.
It  is  not  yours  save  by  unhappy  chance.
For,  if  so,  you  had  gone  past  my  gate  without 
my  seeing  you.’ 

‘Well,  no,’  answered  Pippin.
Darn  him!
Only  two  or  three  hours  had 
passed,  and  it  was  barely  mid-day,  when  the  shadowy  shapes 
of  the  explorers  appeared  again.
But  it  was 
an  old  tradition  that  away  over  there  stood  the  Grey  Havens, 
from  which  at  times  elven-ships  set  sail,  never  to  return.
Round  the  corner  came  a  black  horse,  no  hobbit-pony  but 
a  full-sized  horse;  and  on  it  sat  a  large  man,  who  seemed  to 
crouch  in  the  saddle,  wrapped  in  a  great  black  cloak  and 
hood,  so  that  only  his  boots  in  the  high  stirrups  showed 
below;  his  face  was  shadowed  and  invisible.
He  has  some  sense,  mind  you;  and  when  you  said  go 
alone ,  he  said  no!
He  stepped  quickly 
away,  and  eyed  with  alarm  the  tall  Man,  nearly  twice  his 
height  and  many  times  his  match  in  strength.
‘The  wealth  of  Moria  was 
not  in  gold  and  jewels,  the  toys  of  the  Dwarves;  nor  in  iron, 
their  servant.
You  had 
better  leave  Bag  End  soon,  and  get  out  of  the  Shire  before  the  end 
of  July  at  latest.
By  night  they  had  reached  the  feet  of  the  westward 
slopes,  and  there  they  camped.
‘There  was  a  deal  of  talk,  and  every¬ 
one  had  an  eye-opener.
The  Enemy  is  so  strong  and  terrible.’ 

He  did  not  tell  Gandalf,  but  as  he  was  speaking  a  great 
desire  to  follow  Bilbo  flamed  up  in  his  heart  -  to  follow  Bilbo, 
and  even  perhaps  to  find  him  again.
‘Elrond  commanded  it,’  answered  Gandalf.
The  grass  under  their  feet  was  smooth  and  short,  as  if  it 
had  been  mown  or  shaven.
Trover!
Wolves  are  howling  on  the  wood’s  borders.
They  left  the  washing  up  for  Lobelia.
One  of  these  was  Ohtar,  the  esquire  of 
Isildur,  who  bore  the  shards  of  the  sword  of  Elendil;  and  he 
brought  them  to  Valandil,  the  heir  of  Isildur,  who  being  but 
a  child  had  remained  here  in  Rivendell.
A  great  barrow  stood  there.
‘He  is  resting.’ 

‘Hiding,  you  mean,’  said  Lobelia.
‘Just  this:  you 
must  take  me  along  with  you,  until  I  wish  to  leave  you.’ 

‘Oh,  indeed!’  replied  Frodo,  surprised,  but  not  much 
relieved.
It  was 
already  night  when  at  last  they  halted  and  made  their  camp 
under  some  stunted  alder-trees  by  the  shores  of  the  stream.
But  there,  I  believe  my  looks  are  against 
me.’ 

‘They  are  -  at  first  sight  at  any  rate,’  laughed  Pippin  with 
sudden  relief  after  reading  Gandalf ’s  letter.
But  I  saw  her  some  time  ago,  driving 
a  pony-trap  towards  Bywater  with  a  face  that  would  have 
curdled  new  milk.’ 

‘She  had  already  nearly  curdled  me.
The  goods  were  taken  out  of  the  boats  and  brought  to  the 
top  of  the  bank,  where  there  was  a  level  space.
I  have  been  with  him  on  many  a  journey,  if  never 
on  one  so  dark;  and  there  are  tales  in  Rivendell  of  greater 
deeds  of  his  than  any  that  I  have  seen.
“Who  told 
you,  and  who  sent  you?”  I  asked.
‘In  the  days 
of  fair  weather  we  led  Gollum  through  the  woods;  and  there 
was  a  high  tree  standing  alone  far  from  the  others  which  he 
liked  to  climb.
Celehrimhor  of 
Hollin  drew  these  signs’ 

What  does  it  mean  by  speak,  friend,  and  enter ?’  asked 
Merry.
I  stayed  the  night  in  Bree,  and 
decided  that  I  had  no  time  to  return  to  the  Shire.
But  I  won’t 
deny  I’ll  be  glad  to  see  this  Prancing  Pony  he  spoke  of.
He  was  deep  in  thought,  trying  to  recall  every  memory  of 
his  former  journey  in  the  Mines,  and  considering  anxiously 
the  next  course  that  he  should  take;  a  false  turn  now  might 
be  disastrous.
He  got 
up  and  crept  quietly  away  from  the  fireside  towards  the  outer 
door.
New  messages  have  come 
from  Rivendell  perhaps.’ 

He  removed  the  bandage  first  from  Gimli’s  eyes.
370  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

After  a  while  he  left  the  Company  and  wandered  on  to  the 
ridge;  there  he  stood  in  the  shadow  of  a  tree,  looking  out 
southwards  and  westwards,  with  his  head  posed  as  if  he  was 
listening.
Baggins  of  Bag  End  was  rather  pleasant.
But  their  power  is  in  terror,  and  already  some  in  Bree  are 
in  their  clutch.
They  rode  down  the  bank  and  looked  up  and  down.
At  most  he 
plays  with  the  idea  of  handing  it  on  to  someone  else’s  care  - 
and  that  only  at  an  early  stage,  when  it  first  begins  to  grip.
I  think  one  of  his  spies 
would  -  well,  seem  fairer  and  feel  fouler,  if  you  understand.’ 

‘I  see,’  laughed  Strider.
He  writes  as  if  he  was 
going  into  great  danger.’ 

‘He  has  been  doing  that  for  many  years,’  said  Strider.
They  disliked  Bilbo  and 
detested  Frodo,  but  so  magnificent  was  the  invitation  card, 
written  in  golden  ink,  that  they  had  felt  it  was  impossible  to 
refuse.
You 
could  get  in  and  out  without  being  noticed.
Now  we  will  wish  you  all  a  fair  night  and  untroubled  sleep.’ 

‘Good  night,  my  friends!’  said  Galadriel.
What  sort  of 
folic  are  they  in  Bree?’ 

‘There  are  hobbits  in  Bree,’  said  Merry,  ‘as  well  as  Big 
Folk.
His  own  plan,  while  Gandalf  remained  with  them,  had 
been  to  go  with  Boromir,  and  with  his  sword  help  to  deliver 
Gondor.
I  feared  that  it  was 
a  brave  but  dead  hobbit  that  Aragorn  was  carrying.’ 

What  about  me?’  said  Frodo.
And 
poor  Sam!
No  one  was  there.
‘The 
attack  on  the  Redhorn  Gate  has  tired  us  out,  and  we  must 
rest  here  for  a  while.’ 

‘And  then  where  are  we  to  go?’  asked  Frodo.
“I  said  we, 
for  we  it  may  be,  if  you  will  join  with  me.
Through  an  opening  in  the 
trees  he  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  top  of  the  green  bank  from 
which  they  had  climbed  down.
He  found  his  friends  sitting  in  a  porch  on  the  side  of  the 
house  looking  east.
Wake  up,  indeed!’ 
he  said,  cocking  an  eye  at  Elrond.
‘Wake 
up!
A 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS  177 

light  like  the  glint  of  water  on  dewy  grass  flashed  from  under 
her  feet  as  she  danced.
A 
regular  warren,  by  all  accounts.
I  might  perhaps  have 
consulted  Saruman  the  White,  but  something  always  held 
me  back.’ 

Who  is  he?’  asked  Frodo.
On  this  side  of  the  River  they  passed  forests  of  great 
reeds,  so  tall  that  they  shut  out  all  view  to  the  west,  as  the 
little  boats  went  rustling  by  along  their  fluttering  borders.
How  do  the  Wise 
know  that  this  ring  is  his?
It  may  have 
nothing  to  do  with  Peregrin’s  foolish  stone;  but  probably 
something  has  been  disturbed  that  would  have  been  better 
left  quiet.
To  what  doom  did  you  put 
him?’ 

‘He  is  in  prison,  but  no  worse,’  said  Aragorn.
‘Many  things  I  can  command  the  Mirror  to  reveal,’  she 
answered,  ‘and  to  some  I  can  show  what  they  desire  to  see.
‘He  hated  it  and  loved  it,  as  he 
hated  and  loved  himself.
‘It’s  coming  out  in  a  minute,’  whispered  Pippin  to  Merry.
‘I  have  thought  of  something  better  than  that.
More  will  go  tomorrow.
‘  “Give  us  that,  Deagol,  my  love,”  said  Smeagol,  over  his 
friend’s  shoulder.
One  by  one  white  stars 
sprang  forth  as  the  sky  faded.
Immediately  their  light  was 
shut  off.
They  heard  the 
wind  hissing  among  the  rocks  and  trees,  and  there  was  a 
howling  and  wailing  round  them  in  the  empty  spaces  of  the 
night.
After  a  while  the 
song  became  clearer,  and  with  dread  in  his  heart  he  perceived 
that  it  had  changed  into  an  incantation: 

Cold  be  hand  and  heart  and  bone, 

and  cold  be  sleep  under  stone: 

never  more  to  wake  on  stony  bed, 

never,  till  the  Sun  fails  and  the  Moon  is  dead.
It 
had  eluded  capture,  and  they  had  not  shot  it,  not  knowing 
whether  it  was  good  or  ill,  and  it  had  vanished  down  the 
Silverlode  southward.
A  very  few  were  overlooked  by  accident, 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


35 


but  as  they  turned  up  all  the  same,  that  did  not  matter.
Bathe  it  when  Gimli 
has  heated  water.’ 

He  opened  his  pouch  and  drew  out  some  withered  leaves.
I  don’t  know  what  came  over  me.’ 

‘I  do,’  said  Strider.
On  the  other  side  the  bank  was  steep,  and  up  it  a  winding 
path  climbed  from  the  further  landing.
Too  many  ears  pricking  and  eyes 
prying.’  Sam  ran  off  at  full  speed.
It  has  been  said  that  dragon-fire  could 
melt  and  consume  the  Rings  of  Power,  but  there  is  not  now 
any  dragon  left  on  earth  in  which  the  old  fire  is  hot  enough; 
nor  was  there  ever  any  dragon,  not  even  Ancalagon  the  Black, 
who  could  have  harmed  the  One  Ring,  the  Ruling  Ring,  for 
that  was  made  by  Sauron  himself.
Next  morning  they  set  out  again  soon  after  sunrise.
They  were  on  the  top  of  a  sloping  bank, 
and  the  Road,  now  dim  as  evening  drew  on,  wound  away 
below  them.
He 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS 


185 


wavered,  groping  in  his  pocket,  and  then  fought  with  himself 
again;  and  as  he  did  so  the  arm  crept  nearer.
‘And  what  gift  would  a  Dwarf  ask  of  the  Elves?’  said 
Galadriel,  turning  to  Gimli.
That  will 
be  best,  though  it  will  make  the  journey  slow  and  dull.’ 

Gimli  laughed  suddenly.
Upon  this  very  ring  which  you  have  here 
seen  held  aloft,  round  and  unadorned,  the  letters  that  Isildur 
reported  may  still  be  read,  if  one  has  the  strength  of  will  to 
set  the  golden  thing  in  the  fire  a  while.
But  as  for  the 
feast,  I  don’t  go  in  for  such  things  much  now.
Far  back  behind  them  stood  the  high  place  where  they  had 
breakfasted.
‘ Elen  sila  lumenn’  omentielvo, 
a  star  shines  on  the  hour  of  our  meeting,’  he  added  in  the 
High-elven  speech.
‘It  is  as 
I  said.
‘As  for  the  longer  road:  we  cannot  afford  the  time.
I  have  been  trying  to  discover  something  of  their 
movements;  but  I  have  found  nothing.
They  are  usually  content  merely  to  watch  you,  as  long 
as  daylight  lasts,  and  don’t  do  much.
The  sickle  Moon  was  gleaming  dimly 
among  the  leaves.
Sit  now,  and  wait  for  the  Master  of 
the  house!
There  was 
sun  shining,  and  the  branches  of  trees  were  waving  and  toss¬ 
ing  in  the  wind.
What  can  it  be?’ 

‘Ghash!’  muttered  Gandalf.
The  boards  blazed  with  candles,  white  and 
yellow.
A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK  239 

‘I  am  being  eaten  alive!’  cried  Pippin.
Of  their  own 
stooping  forms  no  shadow  could  be  seen.
I  wish 
I  had  never  seen  the  Ring!
‘If  that  is  so,  it  will  be  some  time  before  they  can  begin  the 
hunt  again.
‘Let  those 
call  it  the  wind  who  will;  there  are  fell  voices  on  the  air;  and 
these  stones  are  aimed  at  us.’ 

‘I  do  call  it  the  wind,’  said  Aragorn.
Chapter  n 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


As  they  prepared  for  sleep  in  the  inn  at  Bree,  darkness  lay  on 
Buckland;  a  mist  strayed  in  the  dells  and  along  the  river-bank.
Then  the  weather  clouded  over.
They  were  suddenly  aware 
of  great  hunger,  for  they  had  not  eaten  anything  since  break¬ 
fast;  but  they  dared  not  make  more  than  a  frugal  supper.
When  Mr.
I  got  it  back  from  Michel  Delving  before  I  started,  and  packed 
it  with  my  luggage.
‘Well,  the  Tale  is  now  told,  from  first  to  last.
With  a  last  effort  Frodo,  dropping  his  sword, 
slipped  the  Ring  from  his  finger  and  closed  his  right  hand 
tight  upon  it.
That  was  his  chief  thought.
It  passed 
the  ruined  bridges  of  Osgiliath,  the  grinning  gates  of  Minas 
Morgul,  and  the  haunted  Mountains,  and  it  looked  upon 
Gorgoroth,  the  valley  of  terror  in  the  Land  of  Mordor.
‘I’m  drownded.
She*  hardly  believed  her  fiery  eyes; 

For  though  it  was  day,  to  her  surprise 
they  all  went  back  to  bed!
They  woke  up,  all  four  at  once,  in  the  morning  light.
He  had  even  brought  along  some  old 
clothes  of  Frodo’s  to  help  him  in  playing  the  part.
There  was  a  round  table,  already  spread  with  a  white  cloth, 
and  on  it  was  a  large  hand-bell.
Yet  I  think  I  caught  a  glimpse,  with  the  tail  of 
my  eye,  as  the  saying  is,  of  something  dark  shooting  under 
the  shadow  of  the  bank.
The  moon  was  waxing, 
and  in  the  early  night-hours  a  cold  grey  light  lay  on  the  land.
Now  lost,  lost  to  those  from  the  East  is  Valimar!
I  have  come  back  from 
dark  journeys  and  long  search  to  make  that  final  test.
‘The  stroke  on  the  left  might  be  a  G-rune  with  thin 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


245 


branches,’  said  Strider.
‘But  I  reckon  I’ll  miss 
them  both  before  long.’ 

The  hobbits  took  no  notice  of  the  inquisitive  heads  that 
peeped  out  of  doors,  or  popped  over  walls  and  fences,  as 
they  passed.
If  our  folk  had  been  exiled 
long  and  far  from  Lothlorien,  who  of  the  Galadhrim,  even 
Celeborn  the  Wise,  would  pass  nigh  and  would  not  wish  to 
look  upon  their  ancient  home,  though  it  had  become  an  abode 
of  dragons?
The  sun  turned  from  the  noon  and  began  to  go  west.
By  day  his  coat 
glistens  like  silver;  and  by  night  it  is  like  a  shade,  and  he 
passes  unseen.
‘It  was  not  an  ore.
After  that  I 
shall  have  another  sleep,  I  think;  but  I  shan’t  be  able  to  close 
my  eyes  until  you  have  finished  the  story  for  me.’ 

Gandalf  moved  his  chair  to  the  bedside  and  took  a  good 
look  at  Frodo.
Then  Tom  put  the  Ring  round  the  end  of  his  little 
finger  and  held  it  up  to  the  candlelight.
His 
fair  and  pleasant  face  was  hideously  changed;  a  raging  fire 
was  in  his  eyes.
‘We 
cannot  look  too  far  ahead.
It  was  not,  I  think,  until  Silverlode  bore  us  back  to  Anduin 
that  we  returned  to  the  time  that  flows  through  mortal  lands 
to  the  Great  Sea.
Pray,  do  nothing  of  the  land  again!
‘At  last  we  are  coming  to  the  habitable  parts,  and  I  guess  that 
we  are  not  far  now  from  the  eastern  side.
This  way  now!’ 

He  led  them  a  short  way  down  a  passage,  and  opened 
a  door.
‘I  do  not  counsel  you  one  way  or  the  other.
‘But  for  the  present  you  may  be 
left  in  peace,  when  you  have  got  rid  of  us.
That  will  save  you  a  good  step,  and  it  might  also 
save  you  trouble  of  another  sort.’ 

Frodo  now  accepted  the  invitation  gratefully,  to  the  relief 
of  Pippin  and  Sam.
But  I  don’t  blame  him  for  not  waiting  -  if 
he  ever  came  here.’ 

‘I  wonder,’  said  Strider,  looking  round  thoughtfully.
‘Then  in  Gondor  we  must  trust  to  such 
weapons  as  we  have.
The  ring  had  given  him 
power  according  to  his  stature.
‘I  shall  go  to  Minas  Tirith,  alone  if  need  be,  for  it  is  my 
duty,’  said  Boromir;  and  after  that  he  was  silent  for  a  while, 
sitting  with  his  eyes  fixed  on  Frodo,  as  if  he  was  trying  to 
read  the  Halfling’s  thoughts.
He  knows  the  land  round  here  well  enough,  but  he  knows 
he  is  not  a  match  for  me  in  a  wood.
‘I  reached  here  at  last  by  a  long  hard  road,  up  the  Hoarwell 
and  through  the  Ettenmoors,  and  down  from  the  north.
Why  didn’t  he  come  to  the  Shire?’ 

‘Ah,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘now  we  come  to  it.
Then  at  once  fear  and  hatred  awoke  in  him.
At  the  bottom  of  the  Hill  on  its  western  side  they  came  to 
the  gate  opening  on  to  a  narrow  lane.
‘Do  not  let  your  hearts  be  troubled,’  she  said.
I  had  an  ugly  dream,  which  I  can’t  remember.
Sam’s  cut  was  burning  like  fire,  and 
his  head  felt  light.
‘But  I  already  know  a  little,  and  I  can 
read  more  in  your  face  and  in  the  thought  behind  your  ques- 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


109 


tions.
Dawn  was  growing  in  the  sky,  and  the  dell  was  filling 
with  grey  light,  when  Strider  at  last  returned.
All  the  power  of  the 
Dark  Lord  was  in  motion.
The  walls  of  Minas  Tirith  may  be  strong,  but  they 
are  not  strong  enough.
‘You  needn’t,’  said  Bilbo.
As  they  stood  upon 
the  hillside,  ready  to  depart,  a  pale  sunlight  gleamed  over  the 
mountain-tops.
‘The  Enemy  still  lacks  one  thing  to  give  him  strength  and 
knowledge  to  beat  down  all  resistance,  break  the  last  defences, 
and  cover  all  the  lands  in  a  second  darkness.
‘Farewell,  sweet  Nimrodel!’  cried  Legolas.
I  need  not  repeat  all  that  they  said  to 
old  Bombadil  or  to  one  another;  but  one  thing  interested  me.
He  does  not  love  Elves 
and  Dwarves,  and  that  drift  was  laid  to  cut  off  our  escape.’ 

‘But  happily  your  Caradhras  has  forgotten  that  you  have 
Men  with  you,’  said  Boromir,  who  came  up  at  that  moment.
Bilbo’s  residence  had  got  rather  cluttered  up  with  things  in 
the  course  of  his  long  life.
Dreadful  as  the  Storm  and  the  Light¬ 
ning!
In  the  middle  of  the  table,  against  the  woven  cloths  upon 
the  wall,  there  was  a  chair  under  a  canopy,  and  there  sat  a 
lady  fair  to  look  upon,  and  so  like  was  she  in  form  of  woman¬ 
hood  to  Elrond  that  Frodo  guessed  that  she  was  one  of  his 


296  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

close  kindred.
In  his 
eyes  gleamed  a  light,  keen  and  commanding.
‘Many  have  received  worse  than 
this  in  payment  for  the  slaying  of  their  first  ore.
In  the  middle  of  the  commotion  the  Sackville-Bagginses 
arrived.
Thin  and  stretched  he  said.
LOTHLORIEN 


443 


When  dawn  came  dim  the  land  was  lost, 

The  mountains  sinking  grey 

Beyond  the  heaving  waves  that  tossed 
Their  plumes  of  blinding  spray.
‘I  thought  that  Elves 
were  all  for  moon  and  stars:  but  this  is  more  Elvish  than 
anything  I  ever  heard  tell  of.
Clothes  are  but  little  loss, 


i88 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


if  you  escape  from  drowning.
Now,  I  fear,  we  must  say  farewell  to  Balin  son  of  Fundin.
‘Get  into  a  corner  and  have  a  sleep,  my  lad,’  he  said  in  a 
kindly  tone.
I  wouldn’t  do  that  for  any  money,’  said 
Mr.
‘It  is  just  as  I  feared,’  he  said,  when  he  came  back.
‘Do  not 
tempt  me!
‘You  told  us  that  you  had  once  passed  through 
the  Mines.
Why’s  none  of  my  business, 
or  yours.
Well,  the  choices  are,  it  seems,  to  submit  to 
Sauron,  or  to  yourself.
‘What  did  you  see?’  said  Pippin  to  Sam,  but  Sam  was  too 
deep  in  thought  to  answer.
‘Elves  seldom  give  un¬ 
guarded  advice,  for  advice  is  a  dangerous  gift,  even  from  the 
wise  to  the  wise,  and  all  courses  may  run  ill.
‘I  can’t  abide  fog,’  said  Sam;  ‘but  this  seems  to  be  a  lucky 
one.
They  were  taller  and  darker  than  the  Men  of 
Bree  and  were  believed  to  have  strange  powers  of  sight 
and  hearing,  and  to  understand  the  languages  of  beasts 
and  birds.
The  wind 
had  been  turning  through  north  to  north-west  during  the 
night,  and  now  it  failed.
Na-chaered  palan-diriel 
0  galadhremmin  ennorath, 

Fanuilos,  le  linnathon 
nef  aear,  si  nef  aearon!
The  big  root  just  twisted  round  and 
tipped  me  in!’ 

‘You  were  dreaming  I  expect,  Mr.
We  will 
carry  them.’ 

Soon  afterwards  they  came  upon  another  stream  that  ran 
down  from  the  west,  and  joined  its  bubbling  water  with 
the  hurrying  Silverlode.
It  seemed  to  Frodo  that  he  was  lifted 
up,  and  passing  over  he  saw  that  the  rock-wall  was  a  circle 
of  hills,  and  that  within  it  was  a  plain,  and  in  the  midst  of  the 
plain  stood  a  pinnacle  of  stone,  like  a  vast  tower  but  not  made 
by  hands.
She  was  our  Mr.
How  long,  I  wonder,  have  you  concealed 
from  me,  the  head  of  the  Council,  a  matter  of  greatest  import?
Tom  went  back  in  again,  and  there  was  a 
sound  of  much  thumping  and  stamping.
‘Now  what  have  you  been  doing,  Mr.
It  cannot  be  unmade  by  your  hands,  or 
by  mine.
Suddenly  the  River  swept  round  a  bend,  and  the  banks 
rose  upon  either  side,  and  the  light  of  Lorien  was  hidden.
Frodo  has  read  some 
already,  as  far  as  it  has  gone.
I  guess  they  were  of  hobbit- 
kind;  akin  to  the  fathers  of  the  fathers  of  the  Stoors,  for  they 
loved  the  River,  and  often  swam  in  it,  or  made  little  boats  of 
reeds.
There  was  a 
great  deal  in  the  background  of  their  minds  and  memories 


72 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


that  was  very  similar.
That  was  poetry!’  said  Pippin.
Well,  no!
But  the  Mirror  will  also  show  things  unbidden,  and  those  are 
often  stranger  and  more  profitable  than  things  which  we  wish 
to  behold.
‘You  misunderstand  me,’  said  Frodo.
Frodo  heard  the  splash  of  water.
‘I  wanted  the 
truth.
And  Ethir  Anduin  he  saw,  the  mighty  delta  of  the  River,  and 
myriads  of  sea-birds  whirling  like  a  white  dust  in  the  sun, 
and  beneath  them  a  green  and  silver  sea,  rippling  in  endless 
lines.
Those  that  were  behind  drew  back  in 
dismay.
Underhill;  and  you  can 
forget  the  name  of  Baggins,  till  he  is  far  away.’ 

‘I’ll  do  that,’  said  Butterbur.
I  ought  to  leave  Bag  End,  leave  the 
Shire,  leave  everything  and  go  away.’  He  sighed.
Good-bye!’  he  said,  looking 
at  his  old  home  and  bowing  to  the  door.
The  snow  was  white  upon  their  peaks.
I  can  still 
remember  ten  score  of  them  without  searching  in  my  mind.
It  beats  me  why  any  Baggins 
of  Hobbiton  should  go  looking  for  a  wife  away  there  in 
Buckland,  where  folks  are  so  queer.’ 

‘And  no  wonder  they’re  queer,’  put  in  Daddy  Twofoot 
(the  Gaffer’s  next-door  neighbour),  ‘if  they  live  on  the  wrong 
side  of  the  Brandywine  River,  and  right  agin  the  Old  Forest.
He 
knew  the  dark  under  the  stars  when  it  was  fearless  -  before 
the  Dark  Lord  came  from  Outside.’ 

A  shadow  seemed  to  pass  by  the  window,  and  the  hobbits 
glanced  hastily  through  the  panes.
The  spirits  of  the  party  rose 
again.
Why 
was  I  chosen?’ 

‘Such  questions  cannot  be  answered,’  said  Gandalf.
He  felt 
his  heart  beat  many  times  before  there  was  any  sound.
But  we’ve  got  a  room  or  two 
in  the  north  wing  that  were  made  special  for  hobbits,  when 
this  place  was  built.
Without  warning  a  storm  of 
howls  broke  out  fierce  and  wild  all  about  the  camp.
I  have  thought  several  times  of  going  back  to  Hobbi¬ 
ton  for  it;  but  I  am  getting  old,  and  they  would  not  let  me: 


302 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Gandalf  and  Elrond,  I  mean.
Swift,  because  they  themselves  change 
little,  and  all  else  fleets  by:  it  is  a  grief  to  them.
We  have  a  long  road,  and  much 
to  do.’ 

They  rose  and  looked  about  them.
Nothing  had  been  seen  or  heard  of  Gollum;  but 
the  wild  wolves  were  still  gathering,  and  were  hunting  again 
far  up  the  Great  River.
At  that  moment  there  was  a  knock  on  the  door,  and  Sam 
came  in.
‘Drink  this!’  said  Glorfindel  to  them,  pouring  for  each  in 
turn  a  little  liquor  from  his  silver-studded  flask  of  leather.
‘I  am  more 
afraid  of  the  Old  Forest  than  of  anything  I  know  about:  the 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED 


141 

stories  about  it  are  a  nightmare;  but  my  vote  hardly  counts, 
as  I  am  not  going  on  the  journey.
The  sound  of  hoofs  drew 
nearer.
Some  say  they 
were  planted  in  the  old  days.’ 

‘Splendid!’  said  Frodo.
He  wore  a  silver  belt,  and  round  his  neck  hung  a  chain  of 
silver  and  diamonds.
Of  the  hobbits  Pippin  proved  the  best  for  he  was  sure-footed, 
and  he  walked  over  quickly,  holding  only  with  one  hand;  but 
he  kept  his  eyes  on  the  bank  ahead  and  did  not  look  down.
There  is  no  time 
for  further  news.
I  feel  as  if  I  was  inside  a  song,  if 
you  take  my  meaning.’ 

Haldir  looked  at  them,  and  he  seemed  indeed  to  take  the 
meaning  of  both  thought  and  word.
‘Do  not  let  him  run  away!’  said  Boromir.
472 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Hi!’  cried  Sam  in  an  outraged  voice.
I 
fear  we  must  leave  the  River  now,  and  make  for  the  portage¬ 
way  as  best  we  can  from  here.’ 

‘That  would  not  be  easy,  even  if  we  were  all  Men,’  said 
Boromir.
With  him  I  may  have  business  of  my  own  ere  all 
is  over.
You  are  leaving  the  Shire,  and  yet  you  doubt  that  you 
will  find  what  you  seek,  or  accomplish  what  you  intend,  or 
that  you  will  ever  return.
There  are  some  funny  things 
going  on  today.
Then  he  laughed.
I  do  not  trust  that  way  since  your  news  of 
Saruman.
He  was  running  on  the  green  turf  and  singing.
‘Fly,  you 
fools!’  he  cried,  and  was  gone.
‘This  is  indeed  wonderful!’  they  said.
The  figure 
by  the  door  moved.
‘It  is  one  thing  to  take 
my  young  friends  walking  over  the  Shire  with  me,  until  we 
are  hungry  and  weary,  and  food  and  bed  are  sweet.
The  others  soon  did  the  same,  and  no  sound  or  dream 
disturbed  their  slumber.
There 
were  fissures  and  chasms  in  the  walls  and  floor,  and  every 
now  and  then  a  crack  would  open  right  before  their  feet.
Merry,  to  whom  the  others  belonged,  had 
not,  in  fact,  given  them  any  such  names,  but  they  answered 
to  the  new  names  that  Tom  had  given  them  for  the  rest  of 
their  lives.
‘Ah,  yes!
Frodo,  sir!’  cried  Sam  quaking.
‘I 
haven’t  seen  or  thought  of  anything  to  make  me  smile  since 
we  left  Lothlorien.’ 

‘It  wasn’t  funny  that  way,  Mr.
On  this  occasion  there  was  plenty  for  all,  even  according  to 
hobbit  standards.
‘Oh,  that  won’t  do!’  said  Bilbo.
At  last  Tom  and  Goldberry  rose  and  cleared  the  table 
swiftly.
The  dragon  passed  like  an 
express  train,  turned  a  somersault,  and  burst  over  Bywater 
with  a  deafening  explosion.
Baggins  -  though  I  daresay  you 
still  like  mushrooms.’  He  laughed.
Frodo  gasped.
‘I  always  imagined  that  as  one  journeyed  south 
it  got  warmer  and  merrier,  until  winter  was  left  behind  for 
ever.’ 

‘But  we  have  not  journeyed  far  south  yet,’  answered 
Aragorn.
Round  the  corner  a  long  arm  was 
groping,  walking  on  its  fingers  towards  Sam,  who  was  lying 
nearest,  and  towards  the  hilt  of  the  sword  that  lay  upon  him.
They  ran  on.
And  of  Earendil  came  the  Kings  of 
Numenor,  that  is  Westernesse.’ 

As  Strider  was  speaking  they  watched  his  strange  eager 
face,  dimly  lit  in  the  red  glow  of  the  wood-fire.
They  contained  instruments,  small,  but  of  perfect 
make  and  enchanting  tones.
Things  have  gone  well  so  far,  and  the 
greater  part  of  the  dark  road  is  over.
Of  course  he’s  had  a  bit  of  schooling,  so  to  speak  -  we  all 
have  -  since  we  left  home,  or  he’d  be  so  terrified  he’d  just  fling 
the  Ring  in  the  River  and  bolt.
The  alarm  was 
spreading.
You  begin  to  see  with  a 


476 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


keen  eye.
Old  Tom  Bombadil  water-lilies  bringing 

Comes  hopping  home  again.
A  sudden  panic  or  madness 
seemed  to  have  fallen  on  the  Company.
So  he  sang,  running  fast,  tossing  up  his  hat  and  catching 
it,  until  he  was  hidden  by  a  fold  of  the  ground:  but  for  some 
time  his  hey  now!
They’re  as  different  as  peas  and  apples.’ 

‘Maybe.
Your  folic  must  not 
remain  on  the  ground.
But  I  was  talking  nonsense.
Are  there  piles  of  jewels  and  gold 
lying  about  here  still?’ 

Gimli  was  silent.
‘My  dear  old  hobbit,  you  don’t 
allow  for  the  inquisitiveness  of  friends.
Yet 
too  slowly.
I  cannot  tell  you  how  glad.
‘Now  take  my 
hand!’ 

‘Save  me,  Mr.
The  thought  of  going  had  been 
heavy  upon  him  from  the  moment  he  awoke;  but  he  guessed 
now  that  they  would  not  go  further  that  day.
He  spoke  at  last  out  of  his  wonder  and  a 
sudden  fear  of  that  silence: 

‘Who  are  you,  Master?’  he  asked.
Stroke  by  stroke  they  laboured  on.
I  do  not  wish  to  drown  my  grief  in  cold  water.’  He  took 
up  a  paddle,  and  steered  towards  the  western  bank,  following 
Aragorn’s  boat  ahead,  which  had  already  moved  out  of  the 
middle  stream.
It  rose  and  fell,  and  ended  on  a  high  piercing  note.
You  have  wisely  kept  that  ring  secret  all  these  years, 
and  it  seemed  to  me  necessary  to  give  your  guests  something 
else  that  would  seem  to  explain  your  sudden  vanishment.’ 

‘And  would  spoil  my  joke.
He  knew  a  little 
of  the  elf-speech  and  listened  eagerly.
‘But  I  could  not  allow  it.
If  he  passes 
will  you  tell  me?
Let  us  wade 
across!
Among  the  Wise  I  am  the 
only  one  that  goes  in  for  hobbit-lore:  an  obscure  branch  of 
knowledge,  but  full  of  surprises.
‘Don’t  let  us  go  too  far!’  said  Frodo.
He  unwound  several 
folds  of  old  cloth,  and  held  up  a  small  shirt  of  mail.
‘  The  Dunadan,’  said  Bilbo.
But  you  must  dig  swift  and  deep, 
if  you  wish  to  hide  from  Ores.’  He  sprang  lightly  up  from  the 
ground  and  caught  a  branch  that  grew  from  the  trunk  high 
above  his  head.
Frodo  could  have  gone  on  living  quietly  at  Bag  End.
The  day’s  march  promised  to  be  warm  and  tiring  work.
Haldir  led  Frodo  before  them,  and  the  Lord  welcomed  him 
in  his  own  tongue.
I  don’t  trust  it.
Even  our  own 
kindred  in  the  North  are  sundered  from  us.
And  with  that  song  the  hobbits  stood  upon  the  threshold, 
and  a  golden  light  was  all  about  them.
Gandalf  felt  the  ground 
with  his  staff  like  a  blind  man.
The  light  of  the  shaft  fell  directly  on  a  table  in  the 
middle  of  the  room:  a  single  oblong  block,  about  two  feet 
high,  upon  which  was  laid  a  great  slab  of  white  stone.
The  air  grew  hot  and  stifling,  but  it 
was  not  foul,  and  at  times  they  felt  currents  of  cooler  air  upon 
their  faces,  issuing  from  half-guessed  openings  in  the  walls.
‘But  we  cannot 
make  any  plans  yet.
I 
should  vote  for  Minas  Tirith.’ 

‘And  so  should  I,’  said  Gimli.
They  made 
no  camp  and  lit  no  fire,  but  lay  huddled  in  the  boats,  moored 
close  together.
Well, 
find  him!
It  was  a  supper  even  better  than  before.
While  the  others 
set  the  food  ready,  Aragorn  bathed  the  hurts  with  water  in 
which  athelas  was  steeped.
But  those  near 
him  were  silent,  intent  upon  the  music  of  the  voices  and  the 


304  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

instruments,  and  they  gave  no  heed  to  anything  else.
They  spoke  together,  and  then  sud¬ 
denly  it  seemed  to  Frodo  that  Arwen  turned  towards  him, 
and  the  light  of  her  eyes  fell  on  him  from  afar  and  pierced 
his  heart.
Do  not  be  afraid!
In  the  midst 
of  it  there  stood  a  single  stone,  standing  tall  under  the  sun 
above,  and  at  this  hour  casting  no  shadow.
Out  of  it,  it  seemed  to  him  that  the  power  and  light 


458 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


came  that  held  all  the  land  in  sway.
Away  below  them  they  could  see  the  Road 
sweeping  round  the  feet  of  the  hills;  and  to  their  right  a  grey 
river  gleamed  pale  in  the  thin  sunshine.
She  was  a  young  Baggins,  and  too  obviously  con¬ 
sidered  her  face  shapely.
On  the  hank  of  the  Silverlode,  at  some  distance  up  from 
the  meeting  of  the  streams,  there  was  a  hythe  of  white  stones 
and  white  wood.
In 
places  there  were  ruined  works  of  stone  beside  the  path,  and 
mounds  of  green  topped  with  slender  birches,  or  fir-trees 
sighing  in  the  wind.
‘Already  the  Sun 
is  climbing  to  noon,  and  I  feel  the  need  of  something  to 
strengthen  me.’ 

‘I  had  not  named  you,’  said  Elrond  smiling.
‘Light,  light  of  Sun  and  Moon,  he  still  feared  and  hated, 
and  he  always  will,  I  think;  but  he  was  cunning.
It  is  they 
who  left  the  firewood  behind.
‘Tell  us  about 
the  Black  Riders!’ 

‘Black  Riders?’  they  said  in  low  voices.
Elladan  and  Elrohir  have 
returned  out  of  the  Wild  unlooked-for,  and  they  had  tidings 
that  I  wished  to  hear  at  once.’ 

Well,  my  dear  fellow,’  said  Bilbo,  ‘now  you’ve  heard  the 
news,  can’t  you  spare  me  a  moment?
‘Of  course,  I  remember!’  he  said.
There  was  a  hideous  yell,  and  the  leaping 
shape  thudded  to  the  ground;  the  Elvish  arrow  had  pierced 
its  throat.
Let 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK  4II 

us  rest,  if  we  can.
He  walked  in  front  with 
Frodo;  next  came  Merry  and  Pippin;  and  last  came  Sam 
leading  the  pony,  which  was  laden  with  as  much  of  their 
baggage  as  they  had  the  heart  to  give  it;  but  already  it  looked 
less  dejected,  as  if  it  approved  of  the  change  in  its  fortunes.
The  sky  spoke  of  rain  to  come;  but  the 
light  was  broadening  quickly,  and  the  red  flowers  on  the 
beans  began  to  glow  against  the  wet  green  leaves.
‘The  power 
of  the  Lady  is  on  it.
The  escort  of  children 
and  stragglers  that  had  followed  them  got  tired  and  turned 
back  at  the  South-gate.
I  don’t  think  you  need  worry  about 
Bilbo.
And  here  in  Riven¬ 
dell  there  live  still  some  of  his  chief  foes:  the  Elven-wise,  lords 
of  the  Eldar  from  beyond  the  furthest  seas.
But  in  the  meantime,  the  general  opinion  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  was  that  Bilbo,  who  had  always  been  rather  cracked, 
had  at  last  gone  quite  mad,  and  had  run  off  into  the  Blue.
Quick!’  shouted  Gandalf 
leaping  back.
Haldir  is  my  name.
If  you  want  to  know, 
the  only  real  eye-openers,  as  you  put  it,  were  you  and  Frodo; 
and  I  was  the  only  one  that  was  not  surprised.’ 

‘Well,  anyway,’  said  Bilbo,  ‘nothing  was  decided  beyond 
choosing  poor  Frodo  and  Sam.
The  voice  seemed  far  away  and  immeasurably  dreary,  some¬ 
times  high  in  the  air  and  thin,  sometimes  like  a  low  moan 
from  the  ground.
Paveyard!
The  noise  subsided.
They  kept  as  close  as 
they  could  to  the  western  side,  and  they  could  see  the  dim 
shapes  of  the  low  cliffs  rising  ever  higher,  shadowy  walls  with 
their  feet  in  the  hurrying  river.
I  found  it,  and  Gollum  would  have  killed  me, 
if  I  hadn’t  kept  it.
‘Ever  since  the  night  on  the  flet.
Then  they  went  out  for  a  sniff  of  air,  and 
glimpse  of  the  stars,  and  then  they  went  to  bed.
Many  that  live  deserve 
death.
But  maybe  when  the  One 
has  gone,  the  Three  will  fail,  and  many  fair  things  will  fade 
and  be  forgotten.
I  fancy  this  is  only 
an  afterthought  of  kind  Master  Ferny’s:  just  a  way  of  increas¬ 
ing  his  profits  from  the  affair.
They  came  to  a  low  room 
with  a  sloping  roof  (a  penthouse,  it  seemed,  built  on  to  the 
north  end  of  the  house).
He  is  tending  your  Ured 
beasts.’ 

The  hobbits  sat  down  gladly  in  low  rush-seated  chairs, 
while  Goldberry  busied  herself  about  the  table;  and  their  eyes 
followed  her,  for  the  slender  grace  of  her  movement  filled 
them  with  quiet  delight.
Gimli 
hewed  the  legs  from  under  another  that  had  sprung  up  on 
Balin’s  tomb.
A  sudden  unreasoning  fear  of  discovery  laid  hold  of  Frodo, 
and  he  thought  of  his  Ring.
Then  one 
evening,  at  the  end  of  June,  soon  after  Frodo’s  plan  had  been 


88 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


finally  arranged,  he  suddenly  announced  that  he  was  going 
off  again  next  morning.
‘It’d  be  nothing  short  of  murder  to  turn  him 
loose  with  all  these  wolves  about.’ 


396 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘It  will  be  short  of  murder,  I  hope,’  said  Gandalf.
My  name  is  Underhill.’ 

‘There  now!’  said  Mr.
awake!
He  bowed  low,  and 
mounted  his  pony,  and  followed  by  his  friends  jogged  slowly 


178 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


down  the  gentle  slope  behind  the  hill.
Up  the  stairs!
Boromir  stirred,  and  Frodo 
looked  at  him.
Don’t  tell  anybody  else!
A  sudden  warmth  and  gladness 
touched  his  heart.
Low  in  the  East  there 
were  black  bars  of  cloud  like  the  fumes  of  a  great  burning.
Who  are  you?
‘The  hobbit’s  bite  is 
deep!
Practically  everybody  living 
near  was  invited.
Oi!’  he  cried.
The  black  fellow  sat  quite  still.
They  lost  the 
thread  of  his  tale  and  shifted  uneasily,  looking  aside  at  one 
another.
Upon  the  further  side  there  rose  to  a  great 
height  a  green  wall  encircling  a  green  hill  thronged  with 
mallorn-trees  taller  than  any  they  had  yet  seen  in  all  the 
land.
Give  me  the  ring  for  a  moment.’ 

Frodo  took  it  from  his  breeches-pocket,  where  it  was 
clasped  to  a  chain  that  hung  from  his  belt.
Almost  they  began  to  hope 
that  they  would  escape.
Was  that  Glorfindel  then?’ 

‘Yes,  you  saw  him  for  a  moment  as  he  is  upon  the  other 
side:  one  of  the  mighty  of  the  Firstborn.
They  still  remembered  the  hopeful  view 
they  had  had  of  the  line  of  the  Road  ahead,  and  they  still 
knew  in  which  direction  it  lay.
Don’t  you  worry 
till  the  morning.
Gandalf  lifted  it  carefully,  but  the  leaves 
cracked  and  broke  as  he  laid  it  on  the  slab.
‘Yes,  and  where  then?’  asked  Merry.
It  went 
on  raining.
‘Haven’t  you  been 
listening  to  all  that  I  have  said?
In  the  distance 
below  him,  but  still  high  above  the  lower  foothills,  dark  dots 
were  circling  in  the  air.
‘Did  you  ask  about  the  sniffing?’ 

‘We  didn’t  discuss  it,’  said  Frodo  with  his  mouth  full.
Sauron  would  deal  with  them  later.
‘A  nice  pickle  we 
have  landed  ourselves  in,  Mr.
‘I  asked 
you  the  same  question  once  before  -  it  seems  a  very  long 
while  ago;  but  you  have  seen  more  of  them  since  then.’ 

‘I  have  indeed!’  said  Sam.
‘We 
have  still  got  to  tidy  up  and  put  the  finishing  touches  to  the 
packing,  before  we  get  to  bed.
Then  Elrond  removed  a  splinter.
‘Go  back  to  the  Land  of  Mordor,  and 


280 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


follow  me  no  more!’  His  voice  sounded  thin  and  shrill  in  his 
own  ears.
Bilbo  went  to  find 
a  treasure,  there  and  back  again;  but  I  go  to  lose  one,  and  not 
return,  as  far  as  I  can  see.’ 

‘But  you  cannot  see  very  far,’  said  Gandalf.
Frodo  tried  to  sing  a  song  to  encourage  them,  but 
his  voice  sank  to  a  murmur.
Every  step  of  his  journey  from  Hobbiton  to  the  Ford  of 
Bruinen  was  questioned  and  considered,  and  everything  that 
he  could  recall  concerning  the  Black  Riders  was  examined.
In  the  morning,  as  they  were  beginning  to  pack  their  slen¬ 
der  goods,  Elves  that  could  speak  their  tongue  came  to  them 
and  brought  them  many  gifts  of  food  and  clothing  for  the 
journey.
Now  I  shall  have 
to  alter  that:  it  does  not  look  like  coming  true;  and  anyway 
there  will  evidently  have  to  be  several  more  chapters,  if  I  live 
to  write  them.
They  have  taken 
the  Bridge  and  second  hall.
They 
sprang  towards  the  door  in  alarm.
Merry  alone  seemed  fairly  cheerful.
The  bridge  cracked.
‘You  were  very  fond  of 
Bilbo  were  you  not?’  he  asked.
We  should  have  had  messages,  even  if  he  could  not  come 
himself.
What  shall  we  do  with  the 
Ring,  the  least  of  rings,  the  trifle  that  Sauron  fancies?
Ere  long  we  shall  come  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Limlight  that  runs  down  from  Fangorn  to  join  the  Great 
River.
Black  drops 
dripped  from  the  blade  and  smoked  on  the  floor.
‘Some  of  the  scouts  have  been  sent 
out  already.
I’ll  last  for  a  bit  now,  sir.’ 

Frodo  shut  and  locked  the  round  door,  and  gave  the  key 
to  Sam.
It  seemed  somehow  the  proper  day  on  which  to  set 
out  and  follow  him.
This  way  was  not  much  used, 
being  hardly  fit  for  carts,  and  there  was  little  traffic  to  the 
Woody  End.
Come  with  me!’ 
And  taking  Frodo’s  hand  in  his,  he  left  the  hill  of  Cerin 
Amroth  and  came  there  never  again  as  living  man.
ai!’  wailed  Legolas.
For  the  Enemy  has  been  close  behind,  closer  even 
than  I  feared.
Frodo.
They  heard  it  splashing  over  a  fall  away  among 
the  shadows  on  their  right.
The  proposal  was  welcomed  by  all;  and  they  sat  down  on 
the  upper  steps,  dim  figures  in  the  gloom.
‘Since  our  open  attempt  on  the  mountain-pass  our  plight 
has  become  more  desperate,  I  fear.
Beneath  these  again  were  two  trees,  each 
bearing  crescent  moons.
A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


409 


Actually  Gandalf  was  awake,  though  lying  still  and  silent.
How  came  the  folk  of  Thranduil 
to  fail  in  their  trust?’ 

‘Not  through  lack  of  watchfulness,’  said  Legolas;  ‘but  per¬ 
haps  through  over-kindliness.
‘No!
Here 
and  there  golden  leaves  tossed  and  floated  on  the  rippling 
stream.
The  night  deepened.
Let  us  hasten!’ 

For  some  time  Frodo  and  Sam  managed  to  keep  up  with 
the  others;  but  Aragorn  was  leading  them  at  a  great  pace, 
and  after  a  while  they  lagged  behind.
Then  you  may  remember 
Galadriel,  and  catch  a  glimpse  far  off  of  Lorien,  that  you 
have  seen  only  in  our  winter.
In  the 
dead  of  night  many  shining  eyes  were  seen  peering  over  the 
brow  of  the  hill.
Then 
with  a  loud  snap  both  cracks  closed  fast  again.
Gandalf  bore  his  staff,  but  girt  at  his  side  was  the 
elven-sword  Glamdring,  the  mate  of  Orcrist  that  lay  now 
upon  the  breast  of  Thorin  under  the  Lonely  Mountain.
‘Meaning  your  hand,  Mr.
Sam 
looked  up  into  the  pale  sky,  fearing  to  see  hawks  or  eagles 
hovering  over  them  with  bright  unfriendly  eyes.
Take  dragons  now.’ 

‘No  thank  ’ee,’  said  Ted,  ‘I  won’t.
Loud  the  challenge  rang 
and  bellowed,  like  the  shout  of  many  throats  under  the 
cavernous  roof.
It  seemed 
certainly  to  be  Gandalf’s.
‘Little  do  I 
resemble  the  figures  of  Elendil  and  Isildur  as  they  stand 
carven  in  their  majesty  in  the  halls  of  Denethor.
The  next  morning  they  were  busy  packing  another  cart 
with  the  remainder  of  the  luggage.
Tom  can’t  be 
always  near  to  open  doors  and  willow-cracks.
I  see  Elf-lords  here.
The  land  became  drier  and  more  barren; 
but  mists  and  vapours  lay  behind  them  on  the  marshes.
A  chill  air  seemed  to  strike 
his  face,  rising  from  invisible  depths.
He  lifted  his  heavy  eyes 
and  saw  leaning  over  him  a  huge  willow-tree,  old  and  hoary.
The  Elves  spread  for  them  a 
pavilion  among  the  trees  near  the  fountain,  and  in  it  they  laid 
soft  couches;  then  speaking  words  of  peace  with  fair  Elvish 
voices  they  left  them.
They  now  hurried  forward  again,  delighted  with  the 
thought  of  climbing  out  for  a  while  above  the  roof  of  the 
Forest.
There  was  a  younger  dwarf  at  Gloin’s  side: 
his  son  Gimli.
His  knowledge 
is  deep,  but  his  pride  has  grown  with  it,  and  he  takes  ill  any 
meddling.
Then  the  ostler  said  to  his  tipsy  cat: 

‘ The  white  horses  of  the  Moon, 

They  neigh  and  champ  their  silver  bits; 

But  their  master’s  been  and  drowned  his  wits, 
and  the  Sun’ll  be  rising  soon!’ 

So  the  cat  on  his  fiddle  played  hey-diddle-diddle, 
a  jig  that  would  wake  the  dead: 

He  squeaked  and  sawed  and  quickened  the  tune, 
While  the  landlord  shook  the  Man  in  the  Moon: 

‘ It’s  after  three!’  he  said.
And  let  not  your  heart  be 
sad,  though  night  must  follow  noon,  and  already  our  evening 
draweth  nigh.’ 

Then  she  brought  the  cup  to  each  of  the  Company,  and 
bade  them  drink  and  farewell.
Down  the  centre  stalked  a  double  line  of  tower¬ 
ing  pillars.
‘Won’t  somebody  give  us  a  bit  of  a  song,  while  the  sun  is 
high?’  said  Merry,  when  they  had  finished.
The  others  looked  at 
him.
Wait!” 

‘And  I  waited.
It  would  be  a  poor  life  in  a  land  where 
no  mallorn  grew.
‘Long  after,  but  still  very  long  ago,  there  lived  by  the  banks 
of  the  Great  River  on  the  edge  of  Wilderland  a  clever-handed 
and  quiet-footed  little  people.
Allow  me  to  congratulate  you  on  your  recovery.’ 

‘Thank  you  very  much,’  said  Frodo.
‘Can’t  go  another  step  with¬ 
out  rest.
Bilbo,  as  I’ve 
always  said,’  the  Gaffer  declared.
On  the  north  side  of 
the  Road  beyond  the  hills  the  country  is  bare  and  flat  for 
miles.’ 

‘Can  the  Riders  see ?’  asked  Merry.
Chapter  4 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


It  was  evening,  and  the  grey  light  was  again  waning  fast, 
when  they  halted  for  the  night.
A  little  spring  fell  tumbling  down  and  fed  the 
grass.
46 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Well,  so  I  have!’  cried  Bilbo.
Gandalf  sat  down  again  and 
puffed  at  his  pipe,  as  if  lost  in  thought.
The  thin  cres¬ 
cent  of  the  Moon  had  fallen  early  into  the  pale  sunset,  but 
the  sky  was  clear  above,  and  though  far  away  in  the  South 
there  were  great  ranges  of  cloud  that  still  shone  faintly,  in  the 
West  stars  glinted  bright.
Beside  the  standing  stone  Gimli  halted  and  looked  up.
‘You  get  down  in  the  waggon  and  cover  up  with  blankets, 
and  we’ll  send  this  rider  to  the  rightabouts!’  He  climbed  out 
and  went  to  the  farmer’s  side.
Sud¬ 
denly  he  knew  in  his  heart  that  they  were  silently  command¬ 
ing  him  to  wait.
‘But  as  for  his  long  life,  Bilbo 
never  connected  it  with  the  ring  at  all.
His  attention  seemed  suddenly  to  be  fixed  on 
Pippin.
He  lay  tossing  and  turning 
and  listening  fearfully  to  the  stealthy  night-noises:  wind  in 
chinks  of  rock,  water  dripping,  a  crack,  the  sudden  rattling 
fall  of  a  loosened  stone.
South  of  Rivendell  they 
rose  ever  higher,  and  bent  westwards;  and  about  the  feet  of 
the  main  range  there  was  tumbled  an  ever  wider  land  of  bleak 
hills,  and  deep  valleys  filled  with  turbulent  waters.
Frodo  was  chilled  to  the  marrow.
Open,  open!
The  third  was  taller  than  the  others: 


256 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


his  hair  was  long  and  gleaming  and  on  his  helm  was  a  crown.
‘ Mithril !
Gandalf  and  Aragorn  strode  forward,  but  the  hill  was 
deserted;  the  hunting  packs  had  fled.
Here  it  is  at  last!’  said  Gandalf.
‘Lobelia  again  most  likely,’  he  thought.
Briefly  Strider  told  of  the  attack  on  their  camp  under 
Weathertop,  and  of  the  deadly  knife.
But,  of  course,  most  of  the  things  were  given  where 
they  would  be  wanted  and  welcome.
‘Someone 
must  get  there  and  warm  the  house  before  you  arrive,’  said 
Merry.
‘Well,  so  they  say,’  said  the  Gaffer.
Gently  are  you  revenged  for  my  testing 
of  your  heart  at  our  first  meeting.
‘Sharp  blades  are  good  to  have,  if  Shire -folk  go 
walking,  east,  south,  or  far  away  into  dark  and  danger.’  Then 
he  told  them  that  these  blades  were  forged  many  long  years 
ago  by  Men  of  Westernesse:  they  were  foes  of  the  Dark  Lord, 
but  they  were  overcome  by  the  evil  king  of  Carn  Dum  in  the 
Land  of  Angmar.
Nothing  like  it  has  happened  since  Bilbo  came 
with  us.
If  they 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


267 


went  on,  down  the  further  side  of  the  ridge,  they  would 
have  the  Mountains  on  their  left.
‘But  we  will  not  here  speak  of  it  more  openly.
If  you  and  Mr.
Is  this  troll-country?’ 

‘No!’  said  Strider.
When  he  returned  he  was  not  reassuring.
‘Well,  it’s  time  you  made  it  up.
‘Well,  here  we  are,  and  here  we  must  pass  another  night,’ 
said  Boromir.
‘I  do  not  understand  all  this,’  he  said.
Then  the 
boats  were  drawn  out  of  the  water  and  carried  up.
Tom  Bombadil!
‘Lothlorien!
‘No,  after  all  I  believe 
your  plan  is  probably  the  best.’ 

‘Well,  I’ve  made  up  my  mind,  anyway.
‘Sam 
was  here  until  I  sent  him  off  to  get  some  rest,  about  half  an 
hour  ago.’ 

‘What  happened  at  the  Ford?’  said  Frodo.
I 
wish  he  was  here  and  could  hear  all  about  it.
Beside  him  Pippin  was  nodding 
towards  sleep;  but  Sam  was  staring  forwards  into  the  rising 
fog.
Oh  yes,  he  came  out.
Peregrin  and  all  could  stay  and  have 
a  bite  with  us,  we  would  be  pleased!’ 

‘And  so  should  we!’  said  Frodo.
‘I  see  that  you  do  not  yet  know  what  to  do,’  said  Celeborn.
‘The  blade  that  is  drawn  from  this  sheath  shall  not  be 
stained  or  broken  even  in  defeat,’  she  said.
‘And  now  I  really  must  be  starting, 
or  somebody  else  will  catch  me.
But  very  soon  he  came  back 
in  dismay.
The  Morgul-lord  and  his 
Black  Riders  have  come  forth.
The  gate-guards  would  not 
let  them  through  by  night,  though  they  might  break  through.
You’re  in 
the  wrong  part  of  the  Shire.
He  would  not 
discuss  his  own  business  and  journeys,  and  seemed  chiefly 
interested  in  small  news  about  Frodo’s  health  and  doings.
There  was  a  constant  stream  of  them  going 
up  the  Hill,  carrying  hundreds  of  polite  variations  on  Thank 
you,  I  shall  certainly  come.
And 
ever  since  that  day  the  race  of  Numenor  has  decayed,  and 
the  span  of  their  years  has  lessened.
‘I  wonder  if  I  shall  ever  look  down  into  that  valley  again,’ 
he  said  quietly.
Then  Pippin,  who  sat  in  the  bow  looking  back,  caught  a 
queer  gleam  in  his  eye,  as  he  peered  forward  gazing  at  Frodo.
There’s  only  one  Dragon  in  Bywater,  and  that’s  Green,’ 
he  said,  getting  a  general  laugh.
‘Say  rather  that 
the  Ring  has  no  power  over  him.
Caradhras  had  defeated  them.
We  have 
only  to  wait.’ 

The  singing  drew  nearer.
‘There’s  more 
behind  this  than  sun  and  warm  air,’  he  muttered  to  himself.
The  breeze  died  away  and  the  River  flowed 
without  a  sound.
Some  of  the  swords  were 
crooked:  orc-scimitars  with  blackened  blades.
A  travel-stained 
cloak  of  heavy  dark-green  cloth  was  drawn  close  about  him, 
and  in  spite  of  the  heat  of  the  room  he  wore  a  hood  that 
overshadowed  his  face;  but  the  gleam  of  his  eyes  could  be 
seen  as  he  watched  the  hobbits.
It  is  the 
last  proof,  and  all  is  now  only  too  clear.
’ 


i62 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


The  hobbits  looked  at  her  in  wonder;  and  she  looked  at 
each  of  them  and  smiled.
Chapter  6 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


Frodo  woke  suddenly.
They  pushed  back  the  table,  and  drew  chairs 
round  the  fire.
But  so  it  was  that  I  came  to  Rivendell  only  two  days 
before  the  Ring,  and  news  of  its  peril  had  already  been 
brought  here  -  which  proved  well  indeed.
‘But  the 
story  still  does  not  seem  complete  to  me.
From  World’s  End  then  he  turned  away, 
and  yearned  again  to  find  afar 
his  home  through  shadows  journeying, 
and  burning  as  an  island  star 
on  high  above  the  mists  he  came, 
a  distant  flame  before  the  Sun, 
a  wonder  ere  the  waking  dawn 
where  grey  the  Norland  waters  run.
They  were  all  thinking  of  the 
Riders,  but  no  one  spoke  of  them.
May  your  beer  be  laid  under  an 
enchantment  of  surpassing  excellence  for  seven  years!”  said 
I.
I  thought  he’d  look  for  them  and  with  his 
words  of  wisdom  take  all  their  fear  away.
Still  what’s  done  can’t  be 
undone.’ 

‘Well,  what  have  you  done?’  said  Frodo,  getting  impatient 
with  the  slow  unravelling  of  Butterbur’s  thoughts.
But  I  have  brought  back  a  gleam  of  good  hope  for  those 
who  are  doomed  to  go  on  feet.
Then  once  more  she  wished  them  each  good  night 
and  left  them  by  the  fireside.
Down  below  among  the  roots  there  was 
the  sound  of  creatures  crawling  and  snuffling.
On  the  eastern 
bank  to  their  left  they  saw  long  formless  slopes  stretching  up 
and  away  towards  the  sky;  brown  and  withered  they  looked, 
as  if  fire  had  passed  over  them,  leaving  no  living  blade  of 
green:  an  unfriendly  waste  without  even  a  broken  tree  or  a 
bold  stone  to  relieve  the  emptiness.
We  seldom  use  any  tongue  but  our 
own;  for  we  dwell  now  in  the  heart  of  the  forest,  and  do  not 
willingly  have  dealings  with  any  other  folk.
‘How  do  the  side  and  shoulder  feel  now?’ 

‘I  don’t  know,’  Frodo  answered.
Follow 
me,  and  keep  your  eyes  open!’  He  sped  up  the  path.
Follow  me!’ 

They  had  gone  little  more  than  a  mile  into  the  forest  when 
they  came  upon  another  stream  flowing  down  swiftly  from 
the  tree-clad  slopes  that  climbed  back  westward  towards  the 
mountains.
It’s  when  we  leave 
this  land  that  we  shall  miss  Gandalf  worse,  I’m  thinking.’ 

‘I  am  afraid  that’s  only  too  true,  Sam,’  said  Frodo.
Hobbits!
‘The  secret  will  not  reach  the  Enemy  from  us,’  said  Gildor.
Old  Gaffer 
Gamgee  got  two  sacks  of  potatoes,  a  new  spade,  a  woollen 
waistcoat,  and  a  bottle  of  ointment  for  creaking  joints.
Evidently  they  had 
struck  what  once  had  been  an  important  road;  and  they  went 
forward  quicker  than  they  had  done  on  their  first  march.
His  wife  stood  in  the  light 
of  the  open  door.
‘Bill,  my  lad,’  he  said,  ‘you  oughtn’t  to  have  took  up  with 
us.
Through  woven  woods  in  Elvenhome 
She  lightly  fled  on  dancing  feet, 

And  left  him  lonely  still  to  roam 
In  the  silent  forest  listening.
I  wondered  often  how  Gollum  came  by  a  Great  Ring, 
as  plainly  it  was  -  that  at  least  was  clear  from  the  first.
But  tonight  I  shall  sleep  without  fear  for  the  first  time 
since  I  left  Rivendell.
‘It  seems  a  terrible  long  time 
that  I’ve  been  away.
But 
at  last,  when  I  had  given  up  the  chase  and  turned  to  other 
paths,  Gollum  was  found.
Ahead  there  loomed  now  against  the  dusky  sky  the  bleak  and 
treeless  backs  of  the  hills.
‘I  will  take  the  Ring,’  he  said,  ‘though  I  do  not  know  the 
way.’ 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


353 


Elrond  raised  his  eyes  and  looked  at  him,  and  Frodo  felt 
his  heart  pierced  by  the  sudden  keenness  of  the  glance.
Beyond  the  ominous  water  were 
reared  vast  cliffs,  their  stern  faces  pallid  in  the  fading  light: 
final  and  impassable.
The  hobbits  were  still  weary,  when  they  set  out  again  early 
next  morning.
And  then  you  can  go  yourself,  and  be  free.’ 

‘I’ll  do  as  I  choose  and  go  as  I  please,’  said  Bilbo  obstinately.
Ores  were 
multiplying  again  in  the  mountains.
‘I  wonder  who  made  this  path,  and  what  for,’  said  Merry, 
as  they  walked  along  one  of  these  avenues,  where  the  stones 
were  unusually  large  and  closely  set.
Your  good  health!’  He  drained  his 
mug  and  went  out  noisily.
How  abominable!
Under 
the  looming  cliffs  they  had  looked  like  mere  bushes,  when 
seen  far  off  from  the  top  of  the  Stair;  but  now  they  towered 
overhead,  stiff,  dark,  and  silent,  throwing  deep  night-shadows 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK  395 

about  their  feet,  standing  like  sentinel  pillars  at  the  end  of  the 
road.
‘Yes,  alas!
Frodo  was  silent.
‘I  have  done  all  that  I  could.
He  was  here  before  the  Kings  and  the 
graves  and  the  Barrow- wights.
But  everywhere  he  looked  he  saw  the  signs  of  war.
As 
soon  as  the  shadows  had  fallen  about  them  and  the  road 
behind  was  dim,  he  had  heard  again  the  quick  patter  of  feet.
The  gate  opened  and  three  huge  dogs  came  pelting 
out  into  the  lane,  and  dashed  towards  the  travellers,  barking 
fiercely.
I  don’t  know  whether  these  Riders  can  read  or  not,  of 
course,  but  I  should  not  have  dared  to  risk  a  written  message, 
in  case  they  got  in  and  searched  the  house.
I  shall  call  you  all  before  the 
break  of  day.’ 

When  at  last  he  had  got  to  bed,  Frodo  could  not  sleep  for 
some  time.
Sometimes  I  have  felt  it  was  like  an  eye 
looking  at  me.
Frodo  stopped  eating  to  look  at  him.
Dead  silence 
was  around  him,  and  over  all  hung  a  clear  blue  sky,  as  the 
Sun  rode  up  from  the  East.
He  knew  that  the  Ring  was  not  lost  for  ever,  but  wished 
us  to  think  so;  for  he  began  to  lust  for  it  for  himself.
A  long-drawn  wail  came 
down  the  wind,  like  the  cry  of  some  evil  and  lonely  creature.
‘The  night  is  getting  old,’  said  Aragorn.
Yet  who  knows  what  may  happen  in  these 
evil  days,  now  that  Minas  Tirith  no  longer  holds  secure  the 
passages  of  Anduin.
Done  by!
We  still  remember,  we  who  dwell 

In  this  far  land  beneath  the  trees, 

Thy  starlight  on  the  Western  Seas.
Take  such  friends  as  are  trusty  and  willing.
Upon  the  hearth  the  fire  is  red, 

Beneath  the  roof  there  is  a  bed; 

But  not  yet  weary  are  our  feet.
As  Frodo  lay,  tired  but  unable  to  close  his  eyes,  it  seemed 
to  him  that  far  away  there  came  a  light  in  the  eastern  sky:  it 
flashed  and  faded  many  times.
At  length  Celeborn  spoke  of  their 
departure.
We  were  outnumbered,  for  Mordor  has  allied  itself  with  the 
Easterlings  and  the  cruel  Haradrim;  but  it  was  not  by 


320 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


numbers  that  we  were  defeated.
They  seemed  to  have  passed  through  some  arched 
doorway  into  a  black  and  empty  space.
Then  Thursday, 
September  the  22nd,  actually  dawned.
THE  GREAT  RIVER 


503 


‘Hoy  there,  Aragorn!’  shouted  Boromir,  as  his  boat 
bumped  into  the  leader.
Strider 
guided  them  confidently  among  the  many  crossing  paths, 
although  left  to  themselves  they  would  soon  have  been  at  a 
loss.
On  the  further  shores  the 
woodlands  still  marched  on  southwards  as  far  as  eye  could 
see,  but  all  the  banks  were  bleak  and  bare.
He  was 
interested,  however,  to  hear  that  Dain  was  still  King  under 
the  Mountain,  and  was  now  old  (having  passed  his  two 
hundred  and  fiftieth  year),  venerable,  and  fabulously  rich.
The  dark 
bent  shapes  of  Gandalf  and  Aragorn  only  a  pace  or  two  ahead 
could  hardly  be  seen.
Bilbo’s  stories  and  all,  I  fancy  I  could  put  a  name  on  the 
creature,  at  a  guess.
The 
hobbit-children  were  so  excited  that  for  a  while  they  almost 
forgot  about  eating.
So 
tighten  your  belts,  and  think  with  hope  of  the  tables  of 
Elrond’s  house!’ 

The  cold  increased  as  darkness  came  on.
He  was  interested  in  roots  and 
beginnings;  he  dived  into  deep  pools;  he  burrowed  under 
trees  and  growing  plants;  he  tunnelled  into  green  mounds; 
and  he  ceased  to  look  up  at  the  hill-tops,  or  the  leaves  on 
trees,  or  the  flowers  opening  in  the  air:  his  head  and  his  eyes 
were  downward.
It  flared  with  a  sudden  white  radiance  like 
lightning;  and  his  voice  rolled  like  thunder.
But  now  she  sang  in  the  ancient 
tongue  of  the  Elves  beyond  the  Sea,  and  he  did  not  under¬ 
stand  the  words:  fair  was  the  music,  but  it  did  not  comfort 
him.
Well,  now  we’re  off  at  last!’  said  Frodo.
They  were  all 
superb.
You  were  in  gravest  peril  while  you  wore  the  Ring,  for 
then  you  were  half  in  the  wraith-world  yourself,  and  they 
might  have  seized  you.
But  I  am  glad 
to  have  heard  you  speak  so  fully.
Send  out  messages  to 
all  the  beasts  and  birds  that  are  your  friends.
Believe  what  you  will, 
there  is  no  other  way  for  us  -  unless  you  would  go  back  to 
Moria-gate,  or  scale  the  pathless  mountains,  or  swim  the 
Great  River  all  alone.’ 

‘Then  lead  on!’  said  Boromir.
But  the  courage  that  had  been  awakened  in  him  was  now 
too  strong:  he  could  not  leave  his  friends  so  easily.
Boats  are  quite  tricky 
enough  for  those  that  sit  still  without  looking  further  for  the 
cause  of  trouble.
There  was  a  loud  rumbling  sound,  as  of  stones  rolling  and 
falling,  and  suddenly  light  streamed  in,  real  light,  the  plain 
light  of  day.
Then  they 


94 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


marched  on  in  silence,  and  Pippin  began  to  lag  behind.
I  heard  tell  of  them 
when  I  was  a  youngster,  but  there’s  no  call  to  believe  in  them 
now.
‘Did  you  see  anything  pass  over?’  he  whispered  to  Gandalf, 
who  was  just  ahead.
Sam  was  speechless.
The  late  afternoon  was  bright  and  peaceful.
He  lay  down  again  and  passed  into  an  uneasy 
dream,  in  which  he  walked  on  the  grass  in  his  garden  in  the 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD  265 

Shire,  but  it  seemed  faint  and  dim,  less  clear  than  the  tall 
black  shadows  that  stood  looking  over  the  hedge.
‘There  is  still  hope,’  he 
said.
A 
few  creatures  came  and  looked  at  them  when  the  fire  had 
died  away.
They  shouldered 
their  packs  and  took  up  their  sticks,  and  walked  round  the 
corner  to  the  west  side  of  Bag  End.
Frodo  felt  a  soft  touch  on  his  face.
5§ 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Little  of  all  this,  of  course,  reached  the  ears  of  ordinary 
hobbits.
That’s  what  you 
came  to  tell  me,  I  suppose,  though  you’ve  taken  a  long  time 
to  come  to  the  point.’ 

Poor  Mr.
At  length  Gildor  turned  to  the  hobbits.
And  I’m  coming  with  you.’ 

‘Now,  Sam,’  said  Frodo,  ‘don’t  hinder  me!
In  the 
end  she  departed  with  Lotho  and  the  spare  key  and  the 
promise  that  the  other  key  would  be  left  at  the  Gamgees’  in 
Bagshot  Row.
Butterbur, 
I  promise  you.
The  Sun  could  not  watch  me  there.
It  does  not  sound  altogether 
encouraging.’ 

‘I  don’t  know,’  said  Frodo.
Gandalf’s  eyes  flashed.
And  unless  we 
have  great  luck,  we  shall  need  all  that  is  left  before  we  see  the 
other  side!
In  their  many-tiered 
branches  and  amid  their  ever-moving  leaves  countless  lights 
were  gleaming,  green  and  gold  and  silver.
What  shall  we  do  with  it?’ 

There  was  a  silence.
The 
Mugworts,  for  instance,  seemed  numerous.
Sam  could  never  describe  in  words,  nor  picture  clearly  to 
himself,  what  he  felt  or  thought  that  night,  though  it  remained 
in  his  memory  as  one  of  the  chief  events  of  his  life.
Frodo 
was  on  guard.
He  knew  the  story  well.
Merry  was  not  there,  and  the  fire  had 
burned  low.
Namarie!
He 
seemed  mighty  put  out,  when  I  told  him  Mr.
He  was  going  to  climb  up,  if  he  could,  and  get  a  look 
at  the  lie  of  the  land.
‘The  Black  Breath.
‘Where  does  that  other  old  animal,  that  Fatty  Lumpkin, 
come  from?’  asked  Frodo.
The  lore  of  the  Elven-rings,  great  and  small,  is  his 
province.
‘It’s  all  ready.
‘And  the  Sword-that-was-Broken 
shall  be  re -forged  ere  I  set  out  to  war.
‘Why  are  you  waking?’  asked  Frodo.
I  am  getting  very  suspicious  of  this 
Forest  and  everything  in  it,  and  I  begin  to  believe  all  the 
stories  about  it.
I  brought  all  the  mementoes  of  my  Jour¬ 
ney  away  with  me,  except  the  Ring.
And  on  a 
time  evil  things  came  forth,  and  they  took  Minas  Ithil  and 
abode  in  it,  and  they  made  it  into  a  place  of  dread;  and  it  is 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


319 


called  Minas  Morgul,  the  Tower  of  Sorcery.
‘We  cannot  get  out,’  said  Gimli.
Frodo  came  out  drying  his  hair.
‘And  doughty  Men  too,  if  I  may  say  it;  though  lesser  men 
with  spades  might  have  served  you  better.
His  watch  was  nearly  over,  when,  far  off  where  he  guessed 
that  the  western  archway  stood,  he  fancied  that  he  could  see 
two  pale  points  of  light,  almost  like  luminous  eyes.
I  think,  Elrond,  that  in  this 
matter  it  would  be  well  to  trust  rather  to  their  friendship  than 
to  great  wisdom.
Sud¬ 
denly  it  became  menacing,  powerful,  harsh  as  stone.
I  have  heard  of  the 
Great  Ring  of  him  that  we  do  not  name;  but  we  believed  that 
it  perished  from  the  world  in  the  ruin  of  his  first  realm.
Even  now,  burdened  as  he  was,  he  was  widening  the 
track  for  those  who  followed,  thrusting  the  snow  aside  as 
he  went.
He  felt  the  sun  upon  his  face  and  hands  when  they 
passed  through  an  open  glade.
‘Very  well,  Frodo 
son  of  Drogo,’  he  said.
Touched  with  gold  and  red  the  autumn  trees 
seemed  to  be  sailing  rootless  in  a  shadowy  sea.
I  wonder  where  he  comes  from.’ 

‘Begging  your  pardon,’  put  in  Sam  suddenly,  ‘I  know 
where  he  comes  from.
Butterbur.
Aragorn  sat  with  his  head  bowed  to  his 
knees;  only  Elrond  knew  fully  what  this  hour  meant  to  him.
It  is  not  our  custom,  but  for  this  time 
we  will  take  you  on  our  road,  and  you  shall  lodge  with  us 
tonight,  if  you  will.’ 

‘O  Fair  Folic!
But  Narsil  was  broken 
and  its  light  extinguished,  and  it  has  not  yet  been  forged 
again.
He  saw  the  elven-flowers  spring 
About  her  feet,  and  healed  again 
He  longed  by  her  to  dance  and  sing 
Upon  the  grass  untroubling.
Fear  took  him,  and  he  ran  back  past 
the  stones  shouting  wildly:  ‘Sam!
Sam  kicked  at 
the  little  fire  and  stamped  out  the  sparks.
‘Well,  that’s  a  warning  to  us  all!’  laughed  Merry.
As  soon  as  he  set  foot  upon  the  far  bank  of  Silverlode  a 
strange  feeling  had  come  upon  him,  and  it  deepened  as  he 
walked  on  into  the  Naith:  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  had 
stepped  over  a  bridge  of  time  into  a  corner  of  the  Elder 
Days,  and  was  now  walking  in  a  world  that  was  no  more.
About  mid-day  they  came  to  a  hill  whose  top  was  wide 
and  flattened,  like  a  shallow  saucer  with  a  green  mounded 
rim.
In  a  few  moments  they  had  shoul¬ 
dered  their  packs  again  and  were  off.
Just  chance  brought  me  then,  if 
chance  you  call  it.
Its  streaming  mane 
kindled,  and  blazed  behind  it.
He  was  right.
How  the  wind  howls!’ 

At  these  words  all  fell  into  silent  thought.
‘All 
because  of  a  pack  of  crows!
There  were  two 
tiny  gleams  of  light  behind,  or  for  a  moment  he  thought  he 
saw  them,  but  at  once  they  slipped  aside  and  vanished.
A  shadow  passed  over  Gloin’s  face.
‘So  do  I,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘and  so  do  all  who  live  to  see  such 
times.
‘Has  he  left  me  that?
There 
will  be  such  a  deal  of  singing  that  the  ideas  will  be  driven  clean 
out  of  my  head.
‘Tom  will  give  you  good  advice,  till  this  day  is  over  (after 
that  your  own  luck  must  go  with  you  and  guide  you) :  four 
miles  along  the  Road  you’ll  come  upon  a  village,  Bree  under 
Bree-hill,  with  doors  looking  westward.
The  tents  began  to  go  up.
I  thought  I  heard  some  soft  plashing  and  a  sniffing 
noise,  a  while  back;  but  you  hear  a  lot  of  such  queer  sounds 
by  a  river  at  night.’ 

He  lay  down,  and  Frodo  sat  up,  huddled  in  his  blankets, 
and  fought  off  his  sleep.
468 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


From  Wilderland  to  Western  shore, 
from  northern  waste  to  southern  hill, 
through  dragon-lair  and  hidden  door 
and  darkling  woods  he  walked  at  will.
Therefore  I  went  first  to  meet  him  and  hear 
his  tale.
He 
said  and  did  things  then  that  filled  me  with  a  fear  that  no 
words  of  Saruman  could  allay.
Beside  it  stooped  a  black  figure.
He  could  not  tell.
Merry  came  in  with  a  rush  fol¬ 
lowed  by  Nob.
He  was  chilled  to  the  bone  and  hungry; 
and  his  head  was  dizzy  as  he  thought  of  the  long  and  painful 
march  downhill.
Not  so  for  Dwarves.
Frodo  thought 
he  could  hear  the  voice  of  Gandalf  above,  muttering  words 
that  ran  down  the  sloping  roof  with  a  sighing  echo.
They  are  good  folic,  the  Bardings.
They  said  that  the 
Nine  were  abroad,  and  that  you  were  astray  bearing  a  great 
burden  without  guidance,  for  Gandalf  had  not  returned.
He  sighed.
I  will  go  alone.
All  about  them  the 
darkness  grew  silent,  and  no  cry  came  on  the  sighing  wind.
Her  maidens  stood  silent  about 
her,  and  a  while  she  looked  upon  her  guests.
‘And  even  if  you  pass  the  Gates  of  Argonath  and  come 
unmolested  to  the  Tindrock,  what  will  you  do  then?
He  rose  and  passed  his  hand  over  his  eyes,  dashing  away 
the  tears.
Bilbo  and  Frodo  had  told  it 
often;  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  he  had  never  more  than  half 
believed  it.
It  was  dark,  and  white  stars  were  shining,  when  Frodo  and 
his  companions  came  at  last  to  the  Greenway-crossing  and 
drew  near  the  village.
That  might  be  well,  if  reason  could  show  any  hope 
of  doing  so.
It  was  not  a  large  meal  (considering 
hobbits  and  the  circumstances),  but  they  felt  much  better  for 
it.
Guard  him  well,  while  I  am  away!’  He 
hurried  off  and  disappeared  again  into  the  darkness.
‘What  in  the  name  of  wonder?’  began  Merry,  feeling  the 
golden  circlet  that  had  slipped  over  one  eye.
You  may  tarry,  or  come  back,  or  turn  aside  into 
other  paths,  as  chance  allows.
there  is  little  hope  of 
that  for  him.
It  was 
not  yet  forgotten  that  there  had  been  a  time  when  there  was 
much  coming  and  going  between  the  Shire  and  Bree.
‘He 
is  not  half  through  yet,  and  to  what  he  will  come  in  the  end 
not  even  Elrond  can  foretell.
Every  one  of  the  various  parting  gifts  had  labels,  written 
out  personally  by  Bilbo,  and  several  had  some  point,  or  some 
joke.
He  comes  out  of  the  Wild,  and  I  never  heard 
no  good  of  such  folic.
Before 
long  no  one  was  left  but  Strider,  who  sat  on,  unnoticed,  by 
the  wall.
The  chamber  was  lit  by  a 
wide  shaft  high  in  the  further  eastern  wall;  it  slanted  upwards 
and,  far  above,  a  small  square  patch  of  blue  sky  could  be 
seen.
I  sought  there  long 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK  387 

for  Thrain  son  of  Thror  after  he  was  lost.
I  have  prepared  practically  every¬ 
thing.
Tell  Bob  there’s  five  ponies  that  have  to  be  stabled.
Leastways  I  was  just  trimming  the  grass-border  under  the 
window,  if  you  follow  me.’  He  picked  up  his  shears  and 
exhibited  them  as  evidence.
‘Thank  you!’  said  the  hobbits,  one  after  the  other.
But  I  spoke  yet  of  my  dread  to  none, 
knowing  the  peril  of  an  untimely  whisper,  if  it  went  astray.
I  do  not  know  what  part  you  have  played  in  this  mischief, 
but  help  now!
‘It  isn’t  natural,  and 
trouble  will  come  of  it!’ 

But  so  far  trouble  had  not  come;  and  as  Mr.
Frodo 
was  stricken  dumb.
What?’  shouted  Frodo,  rushing  round  to  the  other 
side  of  the  tree.
‘There  are  many  powers  in  the  world,  for  good  or  for  evil.
I  do 
not  know  the  reason  for  your  flight,  and  therefore  I  do  not 
know  by  what  means  your  pursuers  will  assail  you.
‘I  think  that  none  of  us  will  wish  to  spend 
another  night  in  Moria.’ 

‘No  indeed!’  said  Boromir.
‘They  do  not  like  all  that  about  ending  and  failing,’  said 
Merry.
The 
doors  are  shut  and  hidden,  and  the  sooner  we  find  them  the 
better.
A  huge  arm  and  shoulder,  with  a  dark  skin  of 
greenish  scales,  was  thrust  through  the  widening  gap.
The  hobbits  crept 
inside,  and  sat  there  upon  a  floor  of  old  leaves  and  decayed 
wood.
But  it  looked  like  the  old 
Sam  Gamgee  sitting  there,  except  that  his  face  was  unusually 
thoughtful.
We  must  away!
It  felt  suddenly  very 
heavy,  as  if  either  it  or  Frodo  himself  was  in  some  way  reluc¬ 
tant  for  Gandalf  to  touch  it.
But  I  have  found  something  very  strange.’ 

He  held  out  his  hand,  and  showed  a  single  pale-green  jewel.
‘That  must  be  the  stone  that  marked 
the  place  where  the  trolls’  gold  was  hidden.
Five  at  least  came  from  the  west,  and  they  threw  down  the 
gates  and  passed  through  Bree  like  a  howling  wind;  and 
the  Bree-folk  are  still  shivering  and  expecting  the  end  of  the 
world.
He  looked  forward 
again,  and  hope  faded.
We  do  not  desire  the  power  of  wizard- 
lords,  only  strength  to  defend  ourselves,  strength  in  a  just 
cause.
‘Hail,  and  well  met  at  last!’  said  the  Elf-lord  to  Frodo.
‘Yes,’  he  answered.
‘We  can’t  begin  life  at  Crickhollow  with  a  quarrel  over  baths.
Away 
eastward  the  sun  was  rising  red  out  of  the  mists  that  lay  thick 
on  the  world.
But  before  you  go,  I  should  like  a  word  with 
you  in  private,  Mr.
Aragorn 
let  them  drift  with  the  stream  as  they  wished,  husbanding 
their  strength  against  weariness  to  come.
They  climbed 
slowly  down  the  southern  side  of  the  ridge;  but  the  way  was 
much  easier  than  they  had  expected,  for  the  slope  was  far 
less  steep  on  this  side,  and  before  long  Frodo  was  able  to 
ride  again.
Do  not  close  it  yet!’  said  Gandalf.
‘And  Gandalf  said:  “The  Ring  has  passed  on,  Bilbo.
‘Hallo!
Before  long  he  came  hurrying  back.
It  had  a  front  on  the  Road,  and  two  wings 
running  back  on  land  partly  cut  out  of  the  lower  slopes  of 
the  hill,  so  that  at  the  rear  the  second-floor  windows  were 
level  with  the  ground.
He  could  not  guess  what  was  the  other 
dark  and  secret  way,  but  the  very  mention  of  it  had  seemed 
to  fill  Aragorn  with  dismay,  and  Frodo  was  glad  that  it  had 
been  abandoned.
I  feared  that  they  were  servants  of 
the  Enemy.
They  knew  him  by  sight,  though  he  only 
appeared  in  Hobbiton  occasionally  and  never  stopped  long; 
but  neither  they  nor  any  but  the  oldest  of  their  elders  had 
seen  one  of  his  firework  displays  -  they  now  belonged  to  a 
legendary  past.
The  four  younger  hobbits  were,  however,  in  high  spirits, 
and  the  party  soon  became  very  cheerful  in  spite  of  Gandalf ’s 
absence.
‘I  don’t  know,  and  I  would  rather  not  guess,’  said  Frodo.
Gollum  meant  to  cheat  all  the  time.
Dora  was  Drogo’s  sister  and  the  eldest  surviving  female  rela¬ 
tive  of  Bilbo  and  Frodo;  she  was  ninety-nine,  and  had  written 
reams  of  good  advice  for  more  than  half  a  century.
Then  let  him 
beware!
‘I  don’t  rightly  know.
The  Middle  Days  are  passing.
‘But  we  aren’t  etten  yet,  and  there  are  some  stout  folk  here 
with  us.
It  seemed 
to  be  the  voice  of  Bilbo  chanting  verses.
awake!
Don’t  you  worry  about  me!
Spare  food 
and  clothes  and  blankets  and  other  needs  were  laden  on  a 
pony,  none  other  than  the  poor  beast  that  they  had  brought 
from  Bree.
‘Good  morning,  merry  friends!’  cried  Tom,  opening  the 
eastern  window  wide.
Yes,  it  is  coming  back  to  life.
Not  far  from  the  road-meeting  they  came  on  the  huge  hulk 
of  a  tree:  it  was  still  alive  and  had  leaves  on  the  small  branches 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


IOI 


that  it  had  put  out  round  the  broken  stumps  of  its  long-fallen 
limbs;  but  it  was  hollow,  and  could  be  entered  by  a  great 
crack  on  the  side  away  from  the  road.
And  then  alas!
Giants  and  other 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


87 


portents  on  the  borders  of  the  Shire  were  forgotten  for  more 
important  matters:  Mr.
‘That’s  all  I  know,’  stammered  Sam,  blushing.
‘Lawks!’  said  Merry,  looking  in.
Soon  I  became  aware  that 
spies  of  many  sorts,  even  beasts  and  birds,  were  gathered 
round  the  Shire,  and  my  fear  grew.
The  sun  was  shining,  clear 
but  not  too  hot.
They  drew 
the  skin-covers  over  their  boats  to  prevent  them  from  being 
flooded,  and  drifted  on;  little  could  be  seen  before  them  or 
about  them  through  the  grey  falling  curtains.
And  I  have  spent  most  of  the 
years  since  then  in  finding  out  the  truth  of  it.’ 

‘There  wasn’t  any  permanent  harm  done,  was  there?’  asked 
Frodo  anxiously.
He  has  an  evil  name  in  the  Bree-land,  and  queer  folk  call  at 
his  house.
‘I  shall  be  drowned!’  he  thought.
I’m  Tom  Bombadil.
The  Company  halted  suddenly,  as  if  they  had  come  to  an 
agreement  without  any  words  being  spoken.
And  I  shall  keep  it,  I 
say.’ 

Gandalf  stood  up.
The  land  was  now  open 
and  fairly  level,  and  they  quickened  their  pace,  but  the  sun 
was  already  sinking  low  when  at  last  they  saw  a  line  of  tall 
trees  ahead,  and  they  knew  that  they  had  come  back  to  the 
Road  after  many  unexpected  adventures.
There  was  a  ringing  clash  and  a  stab  of  white  fire.
The  others,  too, 
looked  more  hopeful.
A  notice  appeared  on  the  gate  at  Bag  End:  no  admit¬ 
tance  except  on  party  business.
Their  ponies  unburdened 
strayed  upon  the  grass.
Frodo  returned  his  gaze  but  said  nothing;  and  Strider  made 
no  further  sign.
Nor  do  I  think  that  we  should 
succeed,  if  we  tried.
Rangers  use 
runes,  and  they  come  here  sometimes.’ 

‘What  could  they  mean,  even  if  Gandalf  made  them?’ 
asked  Merry.
That  night  they  camped  on  a  small  eyot  close  to  the  western 
bank.
Bill 
the  pony  gave  a  wild  neigh  of  fear,  and  turned  tail  and  dashed 
away  along  the  lakeside  into  the  darkness.
‘It  sounds  very  desperate,  but  I 
believe  Frodo  is  right.
Frodo  followed 
slowly,  drawn  by  the  still  blue  water  in  spite  of  hurt  and 
weariness;  Sam  came  up  behind.
In  the  village.
‘I  don’t  know  if  the  Road  has  ever  been  measured  in  miles 
beyond  the  Forsaken  Inn ,  a  day’s  journey  east  of  Bree,’ 
answered  Strider.
The  shadow  of  the  fear  of  the 
Black  Riders  came  suddenly  over  them  again.
Even  without 
a  fog,  their  sleep  at  mid-day  would  have  prevented  them  from 
reaching  it  until  after  nightfall  on  the  day  before.
In  that  lonely  place  Frodo  for  the  first  time  fully 
realized  his  homelessness  and  danger.
The  River  seems  set  on  taking  us 
right  into  their  arms!’ 

They  all  leaned  forward  straining  at  the  paddles:  even  Sam 
took  a  hand.
More 
and  more  followed.
‘I  don’t  know  whether  you  would  care  to  join 
the  company,  when  you  have  supped,’  he  said,  standing 
at  the  door.
Then  silently 
a  great  doorway  was  outlined,  though  not  a  crack  or  joint  had 
been  visible  before.
‘You  were  walking  backwards 
and  forwards.
There  was  a  specially  large 
pavilion,  so  big  that  the  tree  that  grew  in  the  field  was  right 
inside  it,  and  stood  proudly  near  one  end,  at  the  head  of 
the  chief  table.
I  came  to  Hobbiton  and  Frodo  had  gone;  but  I  had 
words  with  old  Gamgee.
Clip-clop ,  clip-clop  came 
the  approaching  rider.
But  first  one 
thing  and  then  another  this  week  have  jogged  my  memory,  as 
the  saying  goes;  and  not  too  late  I  hope.
Frodo 
hesitated  for  a  second:  curiosity  or  some  other  feeling  was 
struggling  with  his  desire  to  hide.
Watch  every  shadow!’  he  said 
in  a  low  voice.
But  those  who  go  with  it  must  not  count 
on  their  errand  being  aided  by  war  or  force.
‘Tell  us,  Master,’  he  said,  ‘about  the  Willow-man.
But  now  in 
this  latter  day  they  are  in  peril  once  more,  for  to  our  sorrow 
the  One  has  been  found.
.
‘If 
Aragorn  is  right  and  Ores  are  near,  then  none  of  us  should 
wander  alone,  and  you  least  of  all:  so  much  depends  on  you.
‘Fear  not!’  he  said.
Master  Everard  Took  and  Miss  Melilot 
Brandybuck  got  on  a  table  and  with  bells  in  their  hands 
began  to  dance  the  Springle-ring:  a  pretty  dance,  but  rather 
vigorous.
The  travellers  came  into  a  long  valley; 
narrow,  deeply  cloven,  dark  and  silent.
By 
both  the  doors  they  could  now  see  that  many  bones  were 
lying,  and  among  them  were  broken  swords  and  axe-heads, 
and  cloven  shields  and  helms.
I  am  one.
Beyond  it  the 
shore  rose  sheer  into  a  grey  cliff,  and  there  was  no  further 
passage  for  those  on  foot.
‘I  am  a  servant  of  the  Secret  Fire,  wielder  of  the 
flame  of  Anor.
Though  the  Neekerbreekers  (as  Sam 
called  them)  had  been  left  behind,  the  midges  still  pursued 
them.
Lost  and  forgotten  be,  darker  than  the  darkness, 

Where  gates  stand  for  ever  shut,  till  the  world  is  mended.
The  others  they  ask  to  wait  a  little,  and  to  keep  watch  at  the 
foot  of  the  tree,  until  they  have  decided  what  is  to  be  done.’ 

*  *  * 


*  See  note  in  Appendix  F:  Of  the  Elves.
I  fear  from  the  sounds  that  boulders 
have  been  piled  up,  and  the  trees  uprooted  and  thrown  across 
the  gate.
Is  not  that  so?’ 

‘It  is,’  said  Frodo;  ‘but  I  thought  my  going  was  a  secret 
known  only  to  Gandalf  and  my  faithful  Sam.’  He  looked 
down  at  Sam,  who  was  snoring  gently.
Four  hobbits!
“For 
Sauron  knows,”  said  he,  “that  one  of  these  was  known  to 
you  on  a  time.” 

‘At  this  we  were  greatly  troubled,  and  we  gave  no  answer.
Just  let  me  get  out  of 
this  boat,  and  I’ll  never  wet  my  toes  in  a  puddle  again,  let 
alone  a  river!’ 

‘Fear  not!’  said  a  strange  voice  behind  him.
He’s  got  no 
gear.
‘Ah!
‘I  am  all  right,’  gasped  Frodo.
He  stood  upon  the  bridge  alone 
and  Fire  and  Shadow  both  defied; 
his  staff  was  broken  on  the  stone, 
in  Khazad-dum  his  wisdom  died.
Deaf¬ 
ening  cheers.
Sam  was  chewing  an  apple  thoughtfully.
I  do  not  lay  it  on  you.
Frodo.
It  had  a  conical  top,  slightly 
flattened  at  the  summit.
Is  Rivendell  safe?’ 

‘Yes,  at  present,  until  all  else  is  conquered.
Its  rays  glanced  upon  a  ring 
about  her  finger;  it  glittered  like  polished  gold  overlaid  with 
silver  light,  and  a  white  stone  in  it  twinkled  as  if  the  Even- 
star  had  come  down  to  rest  upon  her  hand.
And  I  say  to  you:  if  you  pass  the 
doors  of  Moria,  beware!’ 

‘I  will  not  go,’  said  Boromir;  ‘not  unless  the  vote  of 
the  whole  Company  is  against  me.
He  knows  our  business  and  will  help 
you.
Tongues  began  to  wag  in  Hobbiton  and  Bywater;  and 
rumour  of  the  coming  event  travelled  all  over  the  Shire.
I  was  very  comfortable  here,  and  getting 
on  with  my  book.
You  will  probably  make  quite  a  long  stay  here.’ 

‘Ah!’  said  Sam  gloomily.
The  drum-beats  faded.
The  road 
to  the  gate  was  blocked  with  barrows  and  handcarts.
‘But 
I  hope  to  get  across  the  river  without  their  seeing  us.’ 

‘Did  you  find  out  anything  about  them  from  Gildor?’ 

‘Not  much  -  only  hints  and  riddles,’  said  Frodo  evasively.
A 
great  cave -troll,  I  think,  or  more  than  one.
I  was  afraid  all  the  time  that 
it  might  come  to  that,  if  I  was  let  off.
often  repeated,  ending 
with  a  last  help!
Underhill  stay  here  tonight,  as  Mr.
Then  you 
would  see  that  we  have  not  been  idle.’ 

‘I  will  come  and  see  them,  if  ever  I  can,’  said  Frodo.
One  went  to  the  door,  one  to  the  corner 
of  the  house  on  either  side;  and  there  they  stood,  as  still  as 
the  shadows  of  stones,  while  night  went  slowly  on.
What  praise  could  I  say  more?’ 

The  Lady  bowed  her  head,  and  she  turned  then  to  Boro- 
mir,  and  to  him  she  gave  a  belt  of  gold;  and  to  Merry  and 
Pippin  she  gave  small  silver  belts,  each  with  a  clasp  wrought 
like  a  golden  flower.
Frodo’s  spirits  had  risen  for  a  while  after 
his  escape,  and  after  food  and  a  draught  of  the  cordial;  but 
now  a  deep  uneasiness,  growing  to  dread,  crept  over  him 
again.
The  herb  had  also  some  power  over  the  wound,  for  Frodo 
felt  the  pain  and  also  the  sense  of  frozen  cold  lessen  in  his 
side;  but  the  life  did  not  return  to  his  arm,  and  he  could  not 
raise  or  use  his  hand.
‘This  is  a  serious  journey,  not  a  hobbit  walking-party.
The  water  began 
to  murmur.
‘Strider!’  said  Frodo.
Something  has  crept,  or  has  been 
driven  out  of  dark  waters  under  the  mountains.
I’m  that  busy  tonight,  my  head  is  going  round.
The  Bree-folk  were  sympathetic,  but  plainly  not  very  ready 
to  take  a  large  number  of  strangers  into  their  little  land.
What  do  you  want  now?’ 

‘He’s  here  with  my  leave,’  said  Frodo.
‘What  are  they  doing?’  But  the  Elf  had 
gone.
Still,  I  don’t 
suppose  I  have  the  strength  or  luck  left  to  deal  with  the  Ring.
A  deep  silence  fell.
‘I  am  sorry,’  he  said,  ‘but  I  am  dead  tired.
hoy  now!
Only  Gimli  lifted  up  his  head;  a  smouldering  fire 
was  in  his  eyes.
I  can’t  count  days  in  Rivendell,’  said 
Bilbo.
The  house 
and  the  quiet  trees  seemed  to  be  waiting  breathlessly.
Eventually  he  fell  into  a  vague  dream,  in  which 
he  seemed  to  be  looking  out  of  a  high  window  over  a  dark 


142 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


sea  of  tangled  trees.
Its  sides  sprang 
sheer  out  of  the  running  water.
Dark  hides  us  now.
But  they  never  came 
to  Rivendell.
At  the  feet  of  the  trees,  and  all  about  the  green 
hillsides  the  grass  was  studded  with  small  golden  flowers 
shaped  like  stars.
‘How  are  you  going  to  get  through  this?’  asked  Fredegar.
Come  merry  dol!
High  amid  the  branches  of 
a  towering  tree  that  stood  in  the  centre  of  all  there  gleamed 
a  white  flet.
Presently  he  slipped 
out  of  the  door,  followed  by  the  squint-eyed  southerner:  the 
two  had  been  whispering  together  a  good  deal  during  the 
evening.
Riding  over  the  hills,  and  eating  their  fill,  the  warm  sun 
and  the  scent  of  turf,  lying  a  little  too  long,  stretching  out 
their  legs  and  looking  at  the  sky  above  their  noses:  these 
things  are,  perhaps,  enough  to  explain  what  happened.
He  stroked  it  gently  and  then  he  blushed  and 
turned  hastily  away.
For  though  dark  they  stand, 
all  woods  there  be  must  end  at  last, 
and  see  the  open  sun  go  past: 
the  setting  sun,  the  rising  sun, 
the  day’s  end,  or  the  day  begun.
‘All  your  long 
life  we  have  been  friends,  and  you  owe  me  something.
Is  the  supper  ready?’ 

‘It  is,’  said  Goldberry;  ‘but  the  guests  perhaps  are  not?’ 

Tom  clapped  his  hands  and  cried:  ‘Tom,  Tom!
‘Now  we  had  better  have  it  again,’  said  an  Elf.
‘Sam!
Tom  laughed  again,  and  then  he  spun  the  Ring  in  the  air 
-  and  it  vanished  with  a  flash.
But  the  wood  was  burning  fast,  and  the  snow  still  fell.
If  Frodo  had  really 
wanted  to  write  a  book,  and  had  had  many  ears,  he  would 
have  learned  enough  for  several  chapters  in  a  few  minutes.
It  cannot  be  reached  save  by  passing  the  circle  of 
Isengard;  and  in  that  circle  there  is  only  one  gate.
O  reed  by  the  living  pool!
The 
air  became  very  hot.
One  day,  a  year  before  the  Party,  I  happened  to 
be  walking  along  the  road,  when  I  saw  Bilbo  ahead.
I  give  you  one  minute  before  I  call  all 
my  dogs.” 

‘He  gave  a  sort  of  hiss.
Then  standing  up 
he  looked  over  the  land  ahead,  and  called  to  Pippin.
The 
Dwarves  tell  no  tale;  but  even  as  mithril  was  the  foundation 
of  their  wealth,  so  also  it  was  their  destruction:  they  delved 
too  greedily  and  too  deep,  and  disturbed  that  from  which 
they  fled,  Durin’s  Bane.
The  morning  was  passing  towards  noon,  and  still  the  Com¬ 
pany  wandered  and  scrambled  in  a  barren  country  of  red 
stones.
Suddenly 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  167 

he  woke,  or  thought  he  had  waked,  and  yet  still  heard  in  the 
darkness  the  sound  that  had  disturbed  his  dream:  tip-tap, 
squeak',  the  noise  was  like  branches  fretting  in  the  wind, 
twig-fingers  scraping  wall  and  window:  creak,  creak,  creak.
I  should  like  to  write  the 
second  book,  if  I  am  spared.’  He  broke  off  and  turned  to  the 
window  again,  singing  softly.
‘This  waiting  is 
horrible!
‘But  maybe  they  are  not 
on  this  side  of  the  River.
And  I  suppose  I  must  go  alone,  if  I  am  to  do  that  and  save 
the  Shire.
‘Wise  the 
Lady  Galadriel  may  be,’  she  said,  ‘yet  here  she  has  met  her 
match  in  courtesy.
I  tried  not  to,  sir,  but  it  burst  out  of  me:  I  was  so 
upset.’ 

‘It  can’t  be  helped,  Sam,’  said  Frodo  sadly.
To 
tell  you  the  truth,  I  have  been  watching  you  rather  closely 
ever  since  he  left.
‘What  about  it?
‘A  mortal,  Frodo,  who  keeps  one  of  the  Great  Rings,  does 
not  die,  but  he  does  not  grow  or  obtain  more  life,  he  merely 
continues,  until  at  last  every  minute  is  a  weariness.
‘I  am  called  Strider,’  he  said  in  a  low  voice.
Can  you  give  it  to 
them?
It  was  over  nine  years 
since  Frodo  had  seen  or  heard  of  him,  and  he  had  begun  to 
think  that  the  wizard  would  never  return  and  had  given  up 
all  interest  in  hobbits.
We 
know  a  good  deal  about  the  Ring.
‘Black  Riders!’ 
thought  Frodo  as  he  wakened,  with  the  sound  of  the  hoofs 
still  echoing  in  his  mind.
If  you  have 
indeed  come  from  Moria,  the  peril  cannot  be  far  behind.
The  walls  seemed  to  be  trembling.
‘Something  that  is  following  us,’  said  Frodo.
When  I  heard  you  had  left  the  Brandy- 
bucks  and  gone  off  to  that  old  Mr.
We  had  better  be 
going  on.’ 

Going  on  was  not  altogether  easy.
“‘Have  you  indeed,  Gandalf  the  Grey!”  he  scoffed.
He  soon  found  that  the  thicket  was  closer  and  more  tangled 
than  it  had  appeared.
‘Rope!’  he  muttered.
He  smiled.
‘But  I  knew  in  my  heart  that  he  really 
meant  to  go.
It  is  a  fair  tale,  though  it  is  sad,  as  are  all  the 
tales  of  Middle-earth,  and  yet  it  may  lift  up  your  hearts.’  He 
was  silent  for  some  time,  and  then  he  began  not  to  speak  but 
to  chant  softly: 

The  leaves  were  long,  the  grass  was  green, 

The  hemlock-umbels  tall  and  fair, 

And  in  the  glade  a  light  was  seen 
Of  stars  in  shadow  shimmering.
‘That  is  how  it  would  begin.
He  says  so!’ 

Who?
Yours  in  haste 
GANDALF.
To  Rivendell,  where  Elves  yet  dwell 
In  glades  beneath  the  misty  fell, 

Through  moor  and  waste  we  ride  in  haste, 

And  whither  then  we  cannot  tell.
‘We 
must  get  off  as  early  as  possible.
When  I  returned,  many  days  ago,  I  heard  the  ill 
news.
Nothing  happened,  and  there  was 
no  sound.
And  then  in  my  despair  I 
thought  again  of  a  test  that  might  make  the  finding  of  Gollum 
unneeded.
We  have  no  time  to 
seek  for  him  again.
There  is  not  enough  of  the 
breed  of  Bandobras  the  Bullroarer  in  me:  these  howls  freeze 
my  blood.
We 
do  not  set  foot  in  it  so  far  north,  unless  we  must.
‘Well,  Sam,’  he  said  at  last,  ‘I  do  not  like  this 
place  either;  but  I  cannot  think  of  anywhere  better  that  we 
could  reach  before  nightfall.
The  end  comes,  and  then  drums,  drums  in  the  deep.
Let’s 
get  into  the  lane  and  then  we  shan’t  be  trespassing.
‘A  plague  on  Dwarves  and  their  stiff  necks!’ 
said  Legolas.
Still,  they  are  trusty,  and  that 
is  much  in  these  days.
Not 
wholly  so,  yet  it  did  not  achieve  its  end.
But  they  closed  round  at  night,  and  I  was  besieged 
on  the  hill-top,  in  the  old  ring  of  Amon  Sul.
Sud¬ 
denly  Frodo  started  from  sleep.
Suddenly  a  pale  light  appeared  over  the 
crown  of  Weathertop  behind  him.
‘Hullo,  Frodo  my  lad!’  said  Bilbo.
The  Elves 
have  their  own  labours  and  their  own  sorrows,  and  they  are 
little  concerned  with  the  ways  of  hobbits,  or  of  any  other 
creatures  upon  earth.
It  leaped 
towards  him;  almost  like  a  finger  he  felt  it,  searching  for  him.
‘The  wound  was  overcoming  you  at  last.
Outside  the  door  they  all  halted.
‘No,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘but  I  can.
‘Get  some  of  the  longer  sticks  ready  in  your  hands!’ 

For  a  breathless  time  they  sat  there,  silent  and  alert,  with 
their  backs  turned  to  the  wood-fire,  each  gazing  into  the 
shadows  that  encircled  them.
We  are  not  going 
through  the  village  tonight.
Then  he  paid  Frodo  a  brief  visit,  and  after  taking  a  good  look 
at  him  he  went  off  again.
Hold  the  middle  of  the  stream!’ 

As  Frodo  was  borne  towards  them  the  great  pillars  rose 
like  towers  to  meet  him.
There,  maybe,  we  shall  see  some  sign  that 
will  guide  us.’ 

Boromir  held  out  long  against  this  choice;  but  when  it 
became  plain  that  Frodo  would  follow  Aragorn,  wherever  he 
went,  he  gave  in.
At  last  they 
turned  away  and  faded  silently  into  the  dusk.
There  was  no  sign  of  any  other  travellers  to  be  seen.
There  are  queer  folk  about.
The  wood 
was  full  of  the  rumour  of  him,  dreadful  tales  even  among 
beasts  and  birds.
Frodo  looked  at  her  questioningly.
But  get  ready  to  write  a  sequel,  when 
they  come  back.’ 

Bilbo  laughed.
As  he  struggled  on  he  called  again,  and  kept  on  calling 
more  and  more  frantically;  but  he  heard  no  answer  for  some 
time,  and  then  it  seemed  faint  and  far  ahead  and  high  above 
him.
The  song  ended.
Except  in  one  point:  they  were  fond 
of  boats,  and  some  of  them  could  swim.
They  were  so 
deep  in  the  doings  of  the  Four  Farthings  that  they  did  not 
notice  the  arrival  of  a  man  clad  in  dark  green  cloth.
He  was  able 
to  see  beneath  their  black  wrappings.
On  it  was  built  a  house,  so  large  that 
almost  it  would  have  served  for  a  hall  of  Men  upon  the 
earth.
It  ought  to  be 
the  twenty-first.
It  was  impossible  to  find  you,  Frodo, 
in  the  wilderness,  and  it  would  have  been  folly  to  try  with  all 
the  Nine  at  my  heels.
I  was  hard  put 
to  it  indeed:  such  light  and  flame  cannot  have  been  seen  on 
Weathertop  since  the  war-beacons  of  old.
‘To  tell  you  the  truth,  I  wondered 
what  you  were  talking  about.
The  three  peaks  loomed  before 
them,  darkling  in  the  twilight.
Ai!
‘Yet  after  all,  why  not?
‘You  were  inattentive.
But  half  unknown  to  himself  the  regret  that 
he  had  not  gone  with  Bilbo  was  steadily  growing.
He  will  never  love  me,  I  fear;  for  he  bit  me,  and  I  was 
not  gentle.
They  both  looked  terrified.
You  are  old  enough,  and  perhaps  wise  enough.’ 

‘Take  care!
‘To 
Mordor  we  will  take  you!’ 

‘Go  back!’  he  whispered.
Sam  stopped  and  puffed.
‘Come  on!’  he  cried.
I  did  not  enter 
this  way.
He  came  unto  the  timeless  halls 
where  shining  fall  the  countless  years, 
and  endless  reigns  the  Elder  King 
in  Ilmarin  on  Mountain  sheer; 
and  words  unheard  were  spoken  then 


MANY  MEETINGS 


307 


of  folk  of  Men  and  Elven-kin, 
beyond  the  world  were  visions  showed 
forbid  to  those  that  dwell  therein.
I  think  we  ought  to  move  again  this  evening.
And  my  search  would 
have  been  in  vain,  but  for  the  help  that  I  had  from  a  friend: 
Aragorn,  the  greatest  traveller  and  huntsman  of  this  age  of 
the  world.
Gandalf  stood  in  the 
middle  of  the  span,  leaning  on  the  staff  in  his  left  hand,  but 
in  his  other  hand  Glamdring  gleamed,  cold  and  white.
Ask  no  more  of  me!
‘He  is  Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn,’  said  Elrond;  ‘and  he  is 
descended  through  many  fathers  from  Isildur  Elendil’s  son 
of  Minas  Ithil.
‘Just  a  mouthful  each  -  for  all 
of  us.
High  in  the  air  he  tossed 
the  blazing  brand.
‘You  speak  for  me  also,’  he  cried,  and  turning  to  Elrond  he 
said:  ‘The  Wise  may  have  good  reason  to  believe  that  the 
halfling’s  trove  is  indeed  the  Great  Ring  of  long  debate, 
unlikely  though  that  may  seem  to  those  who  know  less.
‘I  wonder,’  said  Strider.
Sam  and  Peregrin  had  not  been  idle.
We  are  still  little  more  than  five  leagues 
from  the  Gates,  but  we  can  go  no  further.
In  your  duck-pond?’ 

‘No,  I  caught  ’em  trespassing,’  said  the  farmer,  ‘and  nearly 
set  my  dogs  on  ’em;  but  they’ll  tell  you  all  the  story,  I’ve  no 
doubt.
It  was  already  mid-day  when  they  drew  near  the  southern 
end  of  the  path,  and  saw  before  them,  in  the  pale  clear  light 
of  the  October  sun,  a  grey-green  bank,  leading  up  like  a 
bridge  on  to  the  northward  slope  of  the  hill.
mithril',  and  the  last  two  lines  Oin  to  seek  for  the  upper 
armouries  of  Third  Deep,  something  go  westwards,  a  blur,  to 
Hollin  gate.’ 

Gandalf  paused  and  set  a  few  leaves  aside.
But  I  suppose  one  could  hammer  it  or  melt  it.’ 

‘Try!’  said  Gandalf.
Outside  the  gate  they  stopped, 
and  three  black  figures  entered,  like  shades  of  night  creeping 
across  the  ground.
They  stepped  out  from  the  Forest,  and  found  a  wide  sweep 
of  grass  welling  up  before  them.
It  has  passed  on.
Let  us  gird  ourselves 
and  weep  no  more!
But  the  time  has  come.
Then  he  ordered 
Pippin  and  Merry  to  heat  as  much  water  as  they  could  in 
their  small  kettles,  and  to  bathe  the  wound  with  it.
Evidently  he 
was  annoyed  on  his  friend’s  behalf.
Radagast  was  not  there;  and  they  had  returned  over  the  high 
pass  that  was  called  the  Redhorn  Gate.
‘Let  us  rest  as  much  as  we  can  now,’  said  Aragorn.
There  are  whole 
chapters  of  stuff  before  you  ever  got  here!’ 

‘Yes,  it  made  quite  a  long  tale,’  answered  Frodo.
‘Well,’  the  farmer 
continued,  approaching  his  point  with  slow  relish,  ‘he  came 
riding  on  a  big  black  horse  in  at  the  gate,  which  happened  to 
be  open,  and  right  up  to  my  door.
Your 
friends  sprang  aside,  off  the  road,  or  they  would  have  been 
ridden  down.
He 
could  dimly  see  the  grey  forms  of  two  elves  sitting  motionless 
with  their  arms  about  their  knees,  speaking  in  whispers.
In  the  late  afternoon,  while  the  others  were  finishing  their 
breakfast,  Gandalf  and  Aragorn  went  aside  together  and 
stood  looking  at  Caradhras.
‘Whatever  happens  to  the  rest  of  my  stuff,  when  the  S.-B.s 
get  their  claws  on  it,  at  any  rate  I  have  found  a  good  home 
for  this!’  said  Frodo,  as  he  drained  his  glass.
‘Now  for  the  last  race!’  said  Gandalf.
There  is  great 
vigour  in  the  waters  that  come  down  from  the  snows  of  the 
Misty  Mountains.’ 

‘Yes,  it  all  comes  back  to  me  now,’  said  Frodo:  ‘the  tremen¬ 
dous  roaring.
‘Up  you  come,  Sam  my  lad!’  said  Frodo.
They  thought  they  could  dimly  guess  a  dark 
cloaked  shape  in  the  mist,  a  yard  or  two  ahead.
He  refused  to  go  into  mourning; 
and  the  next  year  he  gave  a  party  in  honour  of  Bilbo’s 
hundred-and-twelfth  birthday,  which  he  called  a  Hundred¬ 
weight  Feast.
‘If  the  Emyn  Muil  lie  before 
us,  then  we  can  abandon  these  cockle-boats,  and  strike  west¬ 
ward  and  southward,  until  we  come  to  the  Entwash  and  cross 
into  my  own  land.’ 

We  can,  if  we  are  malting  for  Minas  Tirith,’  said  Aragorn, 
‘but  that  is  not  yet  agreed.
A  boat 
was  sliding  down  the  bank  all  by  itself.
Out  of  the  formless  stream  of  sad  but 
horrible  sounds,  strings  of  words  would  now  and  again  shape 
themselves:  grim,  hard,  cold  words,  heartless  and  miserable.
The  three  Riders  that  were  still  in  the  midst  of  the 
Ford  were  overwhelmed:  they  disappeared,  buried  suddenly 
under  angry  foam.
The  Buck- 
land  shore  drew  nearer.
But  then  we  don’t  know  much 
about  Men  in  the  Shire,  except  perhaps  the  Bree-landers.’ 

‘You  don’t  know  much  even  about  them,  if  you  think  old 
Barliman  is  stupid,’  said  Gandalf.
He  seldom 
talks:  not  but  what  he  can  tell  a  rare  tale  when  he  has  the 
mind.
They  seemed 
very  near.
Certainly  he  had  never  “faded”.
It  may  be  your  task  to  find  the  Cracks  of  Doom;  but  that 
quest  may  be  for  others:  I  do  not  know.
Their  great  roots  spread  from  the  wall  to  the  water.
‘And  much  trouble  would  have  been  saved,  if  you  had 
let  him  in,  Barliman.’ 

The  landlord  jumped  with  surprise.
‘  “Why?”  said  Deagol.
‘You  encourage  me.
It  was  a  pleasant, 
comfortable,  welcoming  place;  and  he  found  himself  wishing 
that  he  was  really  coming  here  to  settle  down  in  quiet  retire¬ 
ment.
‘There!’  said  Merry  panting.
Chapter  5 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED 


‘Now  we  had  better  get  home  ourselves,’  said  Merry.
‘The  Halfling!’  he  muttered.
‘Leave  one!’  he  said.
But  there  was  also  a  generous  distribution  of  squibs, 
crackers,  backarappers,  sparklers,  torches,  dwarf-candles,  elf- 
fountains,  goblin-barkers  and  thunder-claps.
The  rising  sun  lit  them  from  beneath  with  flames  of  murky 
red;  but  soon  it  climbed  above  them  into  a  clear  sky.
The 
Bucklanders  kept  their  doors  locked  after  dark,  and  that  also 
was  not  usual  in  the  Shire.
‘Do  you  feel  any  need  to  leave  the  Shire  now  -  now  that 
your  wish  to  see  them  has  come  true  already?’  he  asked.
‘And  now  I  will  answer  Galdor’s  other  questions.
‘I  only  said  I  think  I  shall  come.
Frodo’s  vanishing  trick;  the  appearance  of  the 
black  horsemen;  the  robbing  of  the  stables;  and  not  least 
the  news  that  Strider  the  Ranger  had  joined  the  mysterious 
hobbits,  made  such  a  tale  as  would  last  for  many  uneventful 
years.
‘Waste  of  a  good  apple,’  said  Sam  regret¬ 
fully,  and  strode  on.
No,  they  are  too  cut  and  stained;  I 
cannot  read  them.
We  have  at  least  a  fortnight’s  journey  before 
us,  for  I  do  not  think  we  shall  be  able  to  use  the  Road.’ 

‘A  fortnight!’  said  Frodo.
For  a  while  we  had 
news  and  it  seemed  good:  messages  reported  that  Moria  had 
been  entered  and  a  great  work  begun  there.
Labels  got  torn  off  and  mixed,  and  quarrels  broke  out.
It 
proved  to  be  a  bony,  underfed,  and  dispirited  animal;  but 
it  did  not  look  like  dying  just  yet.
They  sought 
the  Havens  long  ago.’ 

That  morning  they  lit  a  fire  in  a  deep  hollow  shrouded  by 
great  bushes  of  holly,  and  their  supper-breakfast  was  merrier 
than  it  had  been  since  they  set  out.
It  was  his  birthday.
As  Frodo  prepared  to  follow  him,  he  laid  his  hand  upon  the 
tree  beside  the  ladder:  never  before  had  he  been  so  suddenly 
and  so  keenly  aware  of  the  feel  and  texture  of  a  tree’s  skin 
and  of  the  life  within  it.
A  part  of  his  tale  was 
known  to  some  there,  but  the  full  tale  to  none,  and  many 
eyes  were  turned  to  Elrond  in  fear  and  wonder  as  he  told  of 
the  Elven-smiths  of  Eregion  and  their  friendship  with  Moria, 
and  their  eagerness  for  knowledge,  by  which  Sauron  ensnared 
them.
There  might  have  been  some  grumbling  about  ‘dealing 
locally’,  but  that  very  week  orders  began  to  pour  out  of  Bag 
End  for  every  kind  of  provision,  commodity,  or  luxury  that 
could  be  obtained  in  Hobbiton  or  Bywater  or  anywhere  in 
the  neighbourhood.
Pah!’  He  spat  again.
After  a  while  Aragorn  led  the  boats  back  upstream.
The  next  day  more  carts  rolled  up  the  Hill,  and  still  more 
carts.
But  it  was 
the  singing  that  went  to  my  heart,  if  you  know  what  I  mean.’ 

Frodo  sat,  eating,  drinking,  and  talking  with  delight;  but 
his  mind  was  chiefly  on  the  words  spoken.
Clearly  the  ring  had  an  unwholesome  power  that  set  to  work 
on  its  keeper  at  once.
‘Here  there  are  eight,’  he  said.
They  slipped  in  quickly  and  shut  them¬ 
selves  and  the  light  inside.
Through  its  huge  broken  doors  they  passed, 


432  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

and  suddenly  before  them  the  Great  Gates  opened,  an  arch 
of  blazing  light.
The  distance  is  not  great:  the  head  of  the  Rapids 
is  but  half  a  mile  below  us,  and  they  are  little  more  than  a 
mile  long.
He’ll  be  all  right  -  now.
It  was  valiant  but  foolish.
There  he  beheld  Luthien  singing  and 
dancing  in  a  glade  beside  the  enchanted  river  Esgalduin;  and 
he  named  her  Tinuviel,  that  is  Nightingale  in  the  language 
of  old.
You’re  from  the  Shire,  eh?’  he  said,  and  then 
suddenly  he  clapped  his  hand  to  his  forehead,  as  if  trying  to 
remember  something.
There 
was  a  dazzling  flash  that  lit  the  chamber  and  the  passage 
outside.
Pippin  introduced  the  other  two  to  the  farmer.
Though  I’ve  heard  other  names  not 
so  pretty.
Bilbo  Baggins  was  dis¬ 
cussed  in  Hobbiton,  and  indeed  all  over  the  Shire,  for  a  year 
and  a  day,  and  was  remembered  much  longer  than  that.
Beneath  the  Moon  and  under  star 
he  wandered  far  from  northern  strands, 
bewildered  on  enchanted  ways 
beyond  the  days  of  mortal  lands.
Now  stronger  than  ever  they  felt  again  the 
ill  will  of  the  wood  pressing  on  them.
Then  as 
you  did  not  come  back,  I  went  out  for  a  stroll.
But  Tom  was  all  in  clean  blue,  blue  as  rain-washed 
forget-me-nots,  and  he  had  green  stockings.
Sam  was  sitting  on  the  grass  near  the  edge  of  the  wood.
This  is  indeed  a 
strange  chance!’ 

The  hobbits  sat  in  shadow  by  the  wayside.
He  was  sitting  upon  the  Seat  of  Seeing,  on  Amon 
Hen,  the  Hill  of  the  Eye  of  the  Men  of  Numenor.
Half  a  minute!’  cried  Frodo,  running 
out  of  the  room  to  the  door.
No  need 
to  worry.
Mrs.
At  length  Celeborn  spoke  again.
‘Is  everything  ready?’  asked  Bilbo.
‘Here  is  the  Mirror  of  Galadriel,’  she  said.
From  inside  the  hood  came  a  noise  as 
of  someone  sniffing  to  catch  an  elusive  scent;  the  head  turned 
from  side  to  side  of  the  road.
366 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Maybe,’  said  Elrond,  ‘but  let  him  not  vow  to  walk  in  the 
dark,  who  has  not  seen  the  nightfall.’ 

‘Yet  sworn  word  may  strengthen  quaking  heart,’  said 
Gimli.
In  spite  of  the  shining  sun  the  wind  seemed 
chill  after  the  warm  darkness  of  Moria.
Frodo  rose  to  his  feet.
But  when  these  were  foiled  in  Bree 
and  at  Crickhollow,  they  returned  to  their  Captain  with  tid¬ 
ings,  and  so  left  the  Road  unguarded  for  a  while,  except  by 
their  spies.
‘We  cannot  get  out,’  muttered  Gimli.
Gandalf  the  Grey  caught  like  a  fly  in  a  spi¬ 
der’s  treacherous  web!
We  have  come 
too  far  to  the  north,’  he  said,  ‘and  we  must  find  some  way  to 
turn  back  southwards  again.
It  is  wisdom  to  recognize  necessity,  when  all  other 
courses  have  been  weighed,  though  as  folly  it  may  appear  to 
those  who  cling  to  false  hope.
The  Company  took  their  places  in  the  boats  as  before.
He  jumped  up  and  fetched  a  lantern  and  looked 
over  the  gate  at  them  in  surprise.
The  guests  were  commanded  to  sit  quiet,  and  were 
set  in  chairs,  each  with  a  footstool  to  his  tired  feet.
They  do  say  that  one  bigger  than  a  tree  was  seen  up  away 
beyond  the  North  Moors  not  long  back.’ 

‘Who’s  they?
They  rested  and  had  a  light  meal,  talking  quietly  and 
listening  from  time  to  time.
I  cannot  say.
Goldberry  spoke  to  them  and  recalled  their  eyes  and 
thoughts.
‘What  about  the  dogs?’  asked  Frodo 
anxiously.
I’ll  rout  out  Bob 
and  send  him  round  as  soon  as  may  be.’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Strider  reluctantly,  ‘you  had  better  do  that.
Through  the  throat  of  one  huge  leader 
Aragorn  passed  his  sword  with  a  thrust;  with  a  great  sweep 
Boromir  hewed  the  head  off  another.
‘I  think  I  could  probably  make  some  arrangements  by 
then.’ 

To  tell  the  truth,  he  was  very  reluctant  to  start,  now  that  it 
had  come  to  the  point:  Bag  End  seemed  a  more  desirable 
residence  than  it  had  for  years,  and  he  wanted  to  savour  as 
much  as  he  could  of  his  last  summer  in  the  Shire.
The  vision  now  changed.
Let  us  now  laugh  and  be  glad!’ 

‘And  let  us  have  food  and  drink!’  cried  Tom.
May  the  stars  shine 
upon  your  faces!’ 

‘Good  ...
I  grew  angry  and  he  left  me.
Then  it  seemed  as  if  the  log  was  slowly  catching 
us  up.
He  was  glad  that  he  was  riding  in 
the  morning.
It  must  be  pressing.
There  is  no  time  to  lose.’ 

Even  as  he  spoke  they  heard  again  the  pursuing  drum-beat: 
Doom ,  doom ,  doom.
But  now  rising  and  sailing  up 
from  the  South  the  great  clouds  advanced,  sending  out  dark 
outriders  into  the  starry  fields.
Frodo  could  see  him  now, 
sitting  with  Pippin  and  Merry  at  the  upper  end  of  one  of 
the  side-tables  close  to  the  dais.
‘There  is  much  to  tell,  good  and  bad,’  said  Gloin;  ‘yet  it  is 
mostly  good:  we  have  so  far  been  fortunate,  though  we  do 
not  escape  the  shadow  of  these  times.
‘Did  you  not  hear  me, 
Gloin?’  said  Elrond.
‘At  breakfast?’  He  walked 
away  towards  the  edge  of  the  green.
It  was  dark,  but 
not  too  dark  for  the  night-eyes  of  Ores,  and  in  the  star- 
glimmer  they  must  have  offered  their  cunning  foes  some 
mark,  unless  it  was  that  the  grey  cloaks  of  Lorien  and  the 
grey  timber  of  the  elf-wrought  boats  defeated  the  malice  of 
the  archers  of  Mordor.
They  cast  themselves  down  in  the  heather  a  few  yards 
from  the  road-side,  and  fell  asleep  immediately.
Then  suddenly,  as  sleep  was  beginning  to  creep  over 
him  again,  he  was  aware  that  the  wind  had  indeed  fallen,  and 
the  flakes  were  becoming  larger  and  fewer.
They  gave  back  before  him.
You  are 
not  a  very  easy  nut  to  crack,  and  Gandalf  is  worse.
‘But  the  Elves  of  this  land  were 
of  a  race  strange  to  us  of  the  silvan  folic,  and  the  trees  and 
the  grass  do  not  now  remember  them.
So  he  is  seeking  it,  seeking 
it,  and  all  his  thought  is  bent  on  it.
‘That  is 
why  we  have  decided  to  come.
But  -  well,  I  can’t  talk  of  it  any  more.
In  a  small 
desperate  voice  he  began:  Ho!
Mrs.
The  shadow  bent  to  the  ground,  and  then  began  to  crawl 
towards  him.
‘And  mighty  big  ones  too!’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Aragorn,  ‘and  they  are  black  swans.’ 

‘How  wide  and  empty  and  mournful  all  this  country  looks!’ 
said  Frodo.
‘They 
are  wrought  of  ithildin  that  mirrors  only  starlight  and  moon¬ 
light,  and  sleeps  until  it  is  touched  by  one  who  speaks  words 
now  long  forgotten  in  Middle-earth.
They  were  rather  too 
large  for  him.
‘He  may 
watch  all  roads,  likely  and  unlikely.
You  ought  to  tell  me  that  at  least.’ 

‘You  will  soon  hear  all  you  wish  to  know,’  said  Gandalf.
‘The  country 
is  rough  round  here,  and  there  are  bogs  and  all  lands  of 
difficulties  down  in  the  Marish  -  I  know  the  land  in  these 
parts.
There  are  no 
trees  like  the  trees  of  that  land.
He  said  you  had  pestered  him  till  he  told 
you,  so  I  had  better  know  too.
‘And  what  do  you  wish?’  he  said  at 
last.
He  felt  a  desire  to  strike 
him.
‘The 
fire  has  cut  them  off.
Mount  Doom  was  burning,  and  a  great  reek  rising.
The  Dark  Tower  had  been  rebuilt,  it  was  said.
‘I  would  not  have  you  go  without  seeing  Kheled- 
zaram.’  He  ran  down  the  long  green  slope.
A  narrow  gap  appeared  between  them, 
and  the  River  swept  the  boats  towards  it.
The  sun  escaping  from  the  breaking 
clouds,  as  it  sank  towards  the  hills  they  had  left,  was  now 
shining  brightly  again.
‘I  was  on  the  edge  of  a  dream.’  He  stood 
up  and  rubbed  his  eyes,  and  remained  standing,  peering  into 
the  dark,  until  he  was  relieved  by  Legolas.
It  would  be  a  grievous  blow  to  the  world,  if  the  Dark  Power 
overcame  the  Shire;  if  all  your  kind,  jolly,  stupid  Bolgers, 
Hornblowers,  Boffins,  Bracegirdles,  and  the  rest,  not  to 
mention  the  ridiculous  Bagginses,  became  enslaved.’ 

Frodo  shuddered.
For  we  are  come  now  to  the  edge  of  doom.
Swords  were  naked  in  their  pale 
hands;  helms  were  on  their  heads.
Across  the  water  there  were  shrill  cries,  but 
nothing  could  be  seen.
Go!’ 

The  passage  was  lit  by  no  shaft  and  was  utterly  dark.
Had  we 
known  that  this  craft  delighted  you,  we  could  have  taught 
you  much.
Frodo?’  asked  Sam.
Frodo  shivered,  thinking  of  the  lawns 
and  fountains,  the  clear  sun  and  gentle  rains  of  Lothlorien.
Gandalf  took  no  notice  of  them.
As  they  went 
along  it  the  glimmer  grew  stronger,  and  they  saw  that  it  came 
through  a  doorway  on  their  right.
The  country  was  much  rougher 
and  more  barren  than  in  the  green  vale  of  the  Great  River  in 
Wilderland  on  the  other  side  of  the  range,  and  their  going 
would  be  slow;  but  they  hoped  in  this  way  to  escape  the 
notice  of  unfriendly  eyes.
The  channel  grew 
narrower  and  the  River  swifter.
But  stop  me  when 
you  are  weary!
Mark  my  words,  this  all  comes  of  those 
strange  doings  of  Mr.
All  we  could  do  would  be  to  go  right  out 
of  our  way  back  north  on  this  side  of  the  line  of  hills,  where 
the  land  is  all  much  the  same  as  it  is  here.
None  has  ever  caught  him  yet,  for  Tom,  he  is  the  master: 

His  songs  are  stronger  songs,  and  his  feet  are  faster.
Two  of  the  figures  halted.
And  woods  of  nightshade  morrowless.
Suddenly  he  turned 
round  and  called  to  them.
But  go 
now  with  good  hearts!
‘What  do  you  think  of  these  marks?’ 

On  the  flat  under-side  Frodo  saw  some  scratches:  I*- III 
‘There  seems  to  be  a  stroke,  a  dot,  and  three  more  strokes,’ 
he  said.
There  is  a  connexion  with  Bilbo’s  old  adven¬ 
tures,  and  the  Riders  are  looking,  or  perhaps  one  ought  to 
say  searching,  for  him  or  for  me.
‘It  may  be 
nothing,  only  a  wisp  of  thin  cloud.’ 

‘It  was  moving  fast  then,’  muttered  Aragorn,  ‘and  not  with 
the  wind.’ 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


373 


Nothing  further  happened  that  night.
You  shall  clean  grimy 
hands,  and  wash  your  weary  faces;  cast  off  your  muddy 
cloaks  and  comb  out  your  tangles!’ 

He  opened  the  door,  and  they  followed  him  down  a  short 
passage  and  round  a  sharp  turn.
Had  I 
known,  I  would  have  spoken  softer  in  the  Inn  at  Bree!
So  Mr.
As  for  other  animals,  horses  or  ponies  for 
draught  or  what  not,  there  are  very  few  of  them  in  Bree,  and 
they  won’t  be  for  sale.
‘I  have  never  known  you  give  me  pleasant 
advice  before,’  he  said.
With  water  from  the  stream  Galadriel  filled  the  basin  to 
the  brim,  and  breathed  on  it,  and  when  the  water  was  still 
again  she  spoke.
‘They  coidd  have 
reached  here  by  now,  of  course,  if  they  were  not  stopped  at 
the  North-gate,  where  the  Hedge  runs  down  to  the  river- 
bank,  just  this  side  of  the  Bridge.
There  is  all  that  remains  of  the  Stair 
Falls.
Frodo,  the  Moon  was  waning  as  we  lay  on  the  flet  up  in  that 
tree:  a  week  from  the  full,  I  reckon.
‘Heel,  Wolf!’ 
To  the  relief  of  Frodo  and  Sam,  the  dogs  walked  away  and 
let  them  go  free.
‘I  am  waiting  for  you!’ 

‘No!’  said  Frodo;  but  he  did  not  run  away.
’ 

Gimli  was  obstinate.
It  was  also  his  plan 
to  shorten  their  journey  by  cutting  across  another  great  loop 
of  the  Road:  east  beyond  Weathertop  it  changed  its  course 
and  took  a  wide  bend  northwards.
The  invitations  were  limited  to  twelve  dozen  (a  number 
also  called  by  the  hobbits  one  Gross,  though  the  word  was 
not  considered  proper  to  use  of  people);  and  the  guests  were 
selected  from  all  the  families  to  which  Bilbo  and  Frodo  were 
related,  with  the  addition  of  a  few  special  unrelated  friends 
(such  as  Gandalf) .
‘Then  I  will  furnish  your 
Company  with  boats.
I 
do  not  know!’  He  put  his  head  in  his  hands,  and  sat  as  if 
bowed  with  grief.
At  least  one.
Haldir  saw 
it  too.
‘  “Good-day  to  you!”  I  says,  going  out  to  him.
They  came  at  last  to  a  white 


460  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

bridge,  and  crossing  found  the  great  gates  of  the  city:  they 
faced  south-west,  set  between  the  ends  of  the  encircling  wall 
that  here  overlapped,  and  they  were  tall  and  strong,  and  hung 
with  many  lamps.
And  whither  then?
But  they  would  still  wish  to  go,  or  wish  that  they  dared, 
and  be  shamed  and  unhappy.
Rohan  is  beset.
He 
brought  candles  and  a  tray  full  of  plates.
take  someone  as  you  can  trust!
He  stared  at  them  darkly  for  a  moment,  and  then 
slowly  opened  the  gate  and  let  them  ride  through.
‘Whoever  it  was  put  this  stuff  here  meant  to  come  back  it 
seems.’ 

Strider  was  greatly  interested  in  these  discoveries.
There  they  left  Sam  and  Pippin  with  the 
pony  and  their  packs  and  luggage.
‘Come  inside!’  he  shouted,  and 
putting  out  both  his  arms  he  lifted  the  astonished  Sam,  shears, 
grass-clippings  and  all,  right  through  the  window  and  stood 
him  on  the  floor.
Leave  him!
And  he  collected  a  lot,  I  can  tell  you,  before  he  was 
finally  caught.
Their  course  had  been  chosen  to  leave  Woodhall  to  their  left, 
and  to  cut  slanting  through  the  woods  that  clustered  along 
the  eastern  side  of  the  hills,  until  they  reached  the  flats 
beyond.
To  prevent  their  getting  separ¬ 
ated  and  wandering  in  different  directions  they  went  in  file, 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS  l8l 

with  Frodo  leading.
This  is  the 
One  Ring  that  he  lost  many  ages  ago,  to  the  great  weakening 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


67 


of  his  power.
‘And  we’d  better  be  a  bit  more 
watchful  ourselves,  or  we’ll  feel  some  nasty  fingers  round  our 
necks  one  of  these  nights,  if  we  ever  wake  up  to  feel  anything.
This  quest  may  be  attempted  by  the 
weak  with  as  much  hope  as  the  strong.
I’ll  leave  you  to  guess,  if  you  want 
to.’ 

He  got  up  and  came  towards  Frodo.
You  are  an  interfering  old  busy¬ 
body,’  laughed  Bilbo,  ‘but  I  expect  you  know  best,  as  usual.’ 

‘I  do  -  when  I  know  anything.
They  stared  at  him  in  alarm  for  a 
moment  before  he  gasped:  ‘I  have  seen  them,  Frodo!
‘We  must  fend  for 
ourselves  tonight.
The  rushing  of  the  River  over 
the  rocks  of  the  rapids  seemed  to  grow  louder  and  closer.
But  this  hindered  them;  for  the  grass  was  thick 
and  tussocky,  and  the  ground  uneven,  and  the  trees  began  to 
draw  together  into  thickets.
Peel  it!
I  do  not  know.
Torment  in  the  dark  was  the  danger  that  I  feared, 
and  it  did  not  hold  me  back.
‘Dear  old  Frodo!’ 
said  Pippin.
He  remained  in  Moria  and  did  not  escape.’ 

At  these  words  all  the  Elves  in  the  hall  cried  aloud  in  grief 
and  amazement.
He  caught  fish  in  deep  pools  with  invisible 
fingers  and  ate  them  raw.
Trembling  he  looked  up,  in  time  to  see  a  tall  dark 
figure  like  a  shadow  against  the  stars.
‘And  how 
did  the  Enemy  ever  come  to  lose  it,  if  he  was  so  strong,  and 
it  was  so  precious  to  him?’  He  clutched  the  Ring  in  his  hand, 
as  if  he  saw  already  dark  fingers  stretching  out  to  seize  it.
I  heard  them  now  clearly 
in  my  heart.
‘Isn’t  that  odd  now?’  he  said  softly 
to  himself.
There¬ 
fore  Boromir  will  also  be  in  the  Company.
Gandalf  asked  me  to  come  and  see  if  you  were 
ready  to  come  down,  and  I  thought  he  was  joking.’ 

‘I  am  ready,’  said  Frodo.
Underhill,  if  any  name  must  be 
given.
Only  a  gentle  noise  on  the 
edge  of  hearing,  a  soft  fluttering  as  of  a  song  half  whispered, 
seemed  to  stir  in  the  boughs  above.
‘Of  course, 
of  course!
And 
since  the  dwarves  fled,  no  one  dares  to  seek  the  shafts  and 
treasuries  down  in  the  deep  places:  they  are  drowned  in  water 
-  or  in  a  shadow  of  fear.’ 

‘Then  what  do  the  dwarves  want  to  come  back  for?’  asked 
Sam.
It  would  have  been 
useless  in  any  case  to  try  and  win  over  the  honest  Radagast 
to  treachery.
We  are  coming  to  reaches  of  the  River  that  I  do  not 
know  well;  for  I  have  never  journeyed  by  water  in  these  parts 
before,  not  between  here  and  the  rapids  of  Sarn  Gebir.
the  rows  of  silver  dishes 
and  the  store  of  silver  spoons!
If  he  forgets,  I  shall  roast  him.
Upon  it,  as 
a  double  crown,  grew  two  circles  of  trees:  the  outer  had  bark 
of  snowy  white,  and  were  leafless  but  beautiful  in  their 
shapely  nakedness;  the  inner  were  mallorn-trees  of  great 
height,  still  arrayed  in  pale  gold.
Yet  at  the  last  Beren  was  slain  by  the  Wolf  that  came 
from  the  gates  of  Angband,  and  he  died  in  the  arms  of 
Tinuviel.
There  is  no  sound  for  miles  about  us,  and  your  voices 
seem  to  make  the  ground  echo.
Strider  had  changed  his  mind,  and  had  decided  to  leave 
Bree  by  the  main  road.
Grief  at  last  wholly  overcame  them,  and  they 
wept  long:  some  standing  and  silent,  some  cast  upon  the 
ground.
Later  as  the 


502 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


sun  was  setting,  and  the  Company  was  stirring  and  getting 
ready  to  start  again,  he  descried  a  dark  spot  against  the  fading 
light:  a  great  bird  high  and  far  off,  now  wheeling,  now  flying 
on  slowly  southwards.
‘It  is  not  my  part  to  choose  for  you;  but  I  will  help  you  as  I 
may.
Their  farewells  had  been  said  in  the  great  hall  by  the  fire, 
and  they  were  only  waiting  now  for  Gandalf,  who  had  not 
yet  come  out  of  the  house.
Mr.
That’s  what  I 
often  wonder.
‘But  caution  is  one  thing  and  wavering  is 
another.
Then  they  may  return  to  their  own  lands, 
or  else  go  to  the  long  home  of  those  that  fall  in  battle.’ 

There  was  a  silence.
Poor  old  Willow-man,  you  tuck  your  roots  away!
‘I  thought 
you  were  dead!’  he  cried.
Frodo  went 


200 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


forward  and  nearly  bumped  into  a  short  fat  man  with  a  bald 
head  and  a  red  face.
And 
Boromir,  there  lies  in  Minas  Tirith  still,  unread,  I  guess,  by 
any  save  Saruman  and  myself  since  the  kings  failed,  a  scroll 
that  Isildur  made  himself.
Few  had  survived  the  turmoils  of 
the  Elder  Days;  but  when  the  Kings  returned  again  over  the 
Great  Sea  they  had  found  the  Bree-men  still  there,  and  they 
were  still  there  now,  when  the  memory  of  the  old  Kings  had 
faded  into  the  grass.
And  all  folk  were 
whispering  then  of  the  new  Shadow  in  the  South,  and  its 
hatred  of  the  West.
Tom  wagged  his  head  up  and  down,  and 
there  was  a  glint  in  his  eyes  when  he  heard  of  the  Riders.
It  is  a  gift,  I  say;  a  gift  to  the  foes  of  Mordor.
They  must  pass 
into  the  domain  of  the  Enemy  far  from  aid.
The  gift  of  boats 
comforted  him  much,  not  least  because  there  would  now  be 
no  need  to  decide  his  course  for  some  days.
Rich  are  the  hours,  though  short  they 
seem,  in  Caras  Galadhon,  where  Galadriel  wields  the  Elven- 
ring.’ 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


507 


‘That  should  not  have  been  said  outside  Lorien,  not  even 
to  me,’  said  Aragorn.
‘There  is  nothing  more 
that  I  can  do  in  the  wilderness;  and  it  is  chiefly  because  of 
his  wound  that  I  am  so  anxious  to  press  on.
STRIDER  229 

I  had  been  there  to  see.
Old  Gaffer  Gamgee  stopped  even  pretending  to  work 
in  his  garden.
A  change  was  coming 
in  the  weather.
‘Oi!
‘It’s  your  fault  partly, 
Frodo  my  lad:  insisting  on  waiting  for  my  birthday.
The  horse  was  standing  guard  beside  you.
Behind  in 
the  narrow  but  now  well-trodden  track  came  Gandalf,  leading 
Bill  with  Gimli  perched  among  the  baggage.
The  light  was  nearly  gone,  and  they 
were  all  exhausted,  when  at  last  they  reached  the  top.
‘You’ll  wish  you  were  back  here  with  me  before  this  time 
tomorrow.’ 

‘It’s  no  good  arguing  about  it  any  more,’  said  Merry.
After  that  the  hobbits  heard  no  more.
Frodo  soon  went  to  sleep  again;  but  his  dreams  were  again 
troubled  with  the  noise  of  wind  and  of  galloping  hoofs.
Some  people  were  rather  shocked;  but  Frodo  kept  up  the 
custom  of  giving  Bilbo’s  Birthday  Party  year  after  year  until 
they  got  used  to  it.
Shadowfax  they  called  him.
‘It  is  far  more  power¬ 
ful  than  I  ever  dared  to  think  at  first,  so  powerful  that  in  the 
end  it  would  utterly  overcome  anyone  of  mortal  race  who 
possessed  it.
‘I  was  mortally  afraid,  of  course;  but  if  I  had 
known  more,  I  should  not  have  dared  even  to  move.
‘Frightening  my  customers  and  breaking  up  my 
crocks  with  your  acrobatics!’ 

‘I  am  very  sorry  to  have  caused  any  trouble,’  said  Frodo.
‘No,’  she  said.
A  breath  of  deadly 
cold  pierced  him  like  a  spear,  as  with  a  last  spurt,  like  a  flash 
of  white  fire,  the  elf-horse  speeding  as  if  on  wings,  passed 
right  before  the  face  of  the  foremost  Rider.
You  cannot 
pass.’ 

The  Balrog  made  no  answer.
High  towers  that  people  built,  and 
strong  places,  and  havens  of  many  ships;  and  the  winged 
crown  of  the  Kings  of  Men  was  held  in  awe  by  folk  of  many 
tongues.
His  Ring  was  lost  but  not  unmade.
‘Nothing,  unless  it  might  be  -  unless  it  is 
permitted  to  ask,  nay,  to  name  a  single  strand  of  your  hair, 
which  surpasses  the  gold  of  the  earth  as  the  stars  surpass  the 
gems  of  the  mine.
Frodo,  even  in  that  fair  house,  looking 
out  upon  a  sunlit  valley  filled  with  the  noise  of  clear  waters, 
felt  a  dead  darkness  in  his  heart.
I  have  been  in  several 
times:  usually  in  daylight,  of  course,  when  the  trees  are  sleepy 
and  fairly  quiet.’ 

‘Well,  do  as  you  think  best!’  said  Fredegar.
Tom  bowed  to  his  guests.
With 
Elendil,  the  Elf-friend,  he  went  to  the  land  of - ’ 

‘No!’  said  Strider  interrupting,  ‘I  do  not  think  that  tale 
should  be  told  now  with  the  servants  of  the  Enemy  at  hand.
Fear  was  staring  in  his  round  brown  eyes.
Black  specks  swam  before  his  eyes.
No  road  was  made  by  the 
Men  of  Gondor  in  this  region,  for  even  in  their  great  days 
their  realm  did  not  reach  up  Anduin  beyond  the  Emyn  Muil; 
but  there  is  a  portage-way  somewhere  on  the  western  shore, 
if  I  can  find  it.
Only  in  mining  and  building  have  we  surpassed 
the  old  days.
And  it 
is  possible  that  in  the  morning  even  a  Black  Rider  that  rode 
up  and  asked  for  Mr.
But  he  insisted  that 
at  least  they  should  start  early  each  day  and  journey  on  far 
into  the  evening;  for  he  felt  in  his  heart  that  time  was  pressing, 
and  he  feared  that  the  Dark  Lord  had  not  been  idle  while 
they  lingered  in  Lorien.
Slowly  they  crawled  up  to  the  edge  of  the  ring  again,  and 
peered  through  a  cleft  between  two  jagged  stones.
Here  we  are, 
caught,  just  as  they  were  before.
I  heard 
about  the  Ring,  of  course.
Bilbo,  and  in  more  than  looks.
Hollin 
is  no  longer  wholesome  for  us:  it  is  being  watched.’ 

‘And  in  that  case  so  is  the  Redhorn  Gate,’  said  Gandalf; 
‘and  how  we  can  get  over  that  without  being  seen,  I  cannot 
imagine.
Checking  the  horse  to  a  walk,  he  turned  and  looked 
back.
I  am  but  the 
heir  of  Isildur,  not  Isildur  himself.
‘I  do  not  say 


520 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


destroy  it.
In  the  meantime  you  should  try  and  forget  your 
troubles,  Frodo.
‘I  do  not  feel  too  sure  of 
this  Elvish  Lady  and  her  purposes.’ 

‘Speak  no  evil  of  the  Lady  Galadriel!’  said  Aragorn  sternly.
Frodo  looked  at  it  closely,  and  rather  suspiciously  (like  one 
who  has  lent  a  trinket  to  a  juggler) .
Just  nigh  Bill  Ferny’s  house  I  thought  I 
could  see  something  in  the  Road.
There  were  soft  green  slippers 
set  ready  beside  each  bed.
I  could  not  take  it  from 
him  without  doing  greater  harm;  and  I  had  no  right  to  do  so 
anyway.
‘I’ve 
never  heard  those  words  before.’ 

Sam  muttered  something  inaudible.
‘Isildur  took  it,  as  should  not  have 
been.
The  fragrance  of  the  steam  was  refreshing,  and 
those  that  were  unhurt  felt  their  minds  calmed  and  cleared.
It 
was  the  strangest  event  in  the  whole  history  of  the  Ring  so 
far:  Bilbo’s  arrival  just  at  that  time,  and  putting  his  hand  on 
it,  blindly,  in  the  dark.
Frodo.
He  felt  a  delight  in  wood  and  the 
touch  of  it,  neither  as  forester  nor  as  carpenter;  it  was  the 
delight  of  the  living  tree  itself.
Many  of  the  lower  windows  showed 
lights  behind  thick  curtains.
They  do  say 
the  trees  do  actually  move,  and  can  surround  strangers  and 
hem  them  in.
Were  you  coming 
to  visit  me?
‘Don’t  you  know  my  name  yet?
Almost  he  seemed  to  have  forgotten  Frodo,  while  his  talk 
dwelt  on  walls  and  weapons,  and  the  mustering  of  men;  and 
he  drew  plans  for  great  alliances  and  glorious  victories  to  be; 
and  he  cast  down  Mordor,  and  became  himself  a  mighty 
king,  benevolent  and  wise.
He  was  loth  to  speak  and  his  tale  was  unclear,  but 
it  is  beyond  all  doubt  that  he  went  to  Mordor,  and  there  all 
that  he  knew  was  forced  from  him.
‘Where?’ 

‘Here.
Bilbo  had  a  corslet  of  mithril-rings 
that  Thorin  gave  him.
‘Or  to  shepherds.
Here  he  must  lie  in  the  halls  of  his  fathers.
‘That’s 


530 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


hard,  trying  to  go  without  me  and  all.
Now  that  he  was  himself  growing  old  and 
stiff  in  the  joints,  the  job  was  mainly  carried  on  by  his  young¬ 
est  son,  Sam  Gamgee.
‘And  yet  less  thanks  have  we  than  you.
All  black  he  was  himself, 
too,  and  cloaked  and  hooded  up,  as  if  he  did  not  want  to  be 
known.
All  were  undamaged  save  one  of  which  only  the  point  was 
left.
‘If 
Frodo  won’t  talk,  I  will  tell  you  the  whole  tale  from  the 
beginning.’  He  then  gave  a  full  account  of  their  journey  from 
the  time  when  they  left  Hobbiton.
Throw 
yourself  in  next  time,  and  then  you  will  be  no  further  nuis¬ 
ance.
The  blade  was  notched.
If  that  is  so, 
we  must  be  wary.’ 

‘I  wish  we  could  feel  sure  that  he  made  the  marks,  whatever 
they  may  mean,’  said  Frodo.
You  need  not  bow!
He  felt  the  Ring  on  its  chain,  and  quite  unac¬ 
countably  the  desire  came  over  him  to  slip  it  on  and  vanish 
out  of  the  silly  situation.
Come  on,  guide  me  round  the  corners!’ 

Sam  led  him  along  several  passages  and  down  many  steps 
and  out  into  a  high  garden  above  the  steep  bank  of  the  river.
He  named  the  nameless  hills  and  dells; 

He  drank  from  yet  untasted  wells; 

He  stooped  and  looked  in  Mirrormere, 

And  saw  a  crown  of  stars  appear, 

As  gems  upon  a  silver  thread, 

Above  the  shadow  of  his  head.
Yet  now  all  things  but  you  are  silent.
Now  I  am  going  to  bed.’ 

*  *  * 


48 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


As  master  of  Bag  End  Frodo  felt  it  his  painful  duty  to  say 
good-bye  to  the  guests.
I  don’t  think  we  need  be  afraid.
THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


365 


The  others  could  be  seen  as  grey  shapes  in  the  darkness.
It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at 
that  he  became  very  unpopular  and  was  shunned  (when  vis¬ 
ible)  by  all  his  relations.
Together  we  sought  for  Gollum  down  the  whole 
length  of  Wilderland,  without  hope,  and  without  success.
It  has  got  far  too  much  hold  on  you.
Behind  them  stood 
low  crumbling  cliffs,  and  chimneys  of  grey  weathered  stone 
dark  with  ivy;  and  beyond  these  again  there  rose  high  ridges 
crowned  with  wind-writhen  firs.
I  know  many;  but  to  do  things  of  that  kind 
rightly  requires  time,  and  even  then  the  door  can  be  broken 
by  strength.
Even  as  they  stepped  over  the  threshold  a  single  clear 
voice  rose  in  song.
Many  words  and  few  to  the  point.
Suddenly  he  noticed, 
not  far  from  the  further  end  of  the  fire,  a  small  dark  figure 
seated  on  a  stool  with  his  back  propped  against  a  pillar.
Where  are  my 
clothes?’  He  flung  his  circlet,  belt,  and  rings  on  the  grass,  and 
looked  round  helplessly,  as  if  he  expected  to  find  his  cloak, 
jacket,  and  breeches,  and  other  hobbit-garments  lying  some¬ 
where  to  hand.
The  might 
of  Elrond  is  in  wisdom  not  in  weapons,  it  is  said.
‘And  if  you  are  supposed  to  be  on  the  road, 
there  is  some  chance  that  you  will  be  looked  for  on  the  road 
and  not  off  it.’ 

‘All  right!’  said  Pippin.
The  wind  was  shifting 
again.
Take  it  off!
‘It  is  mine,  I  tell  you.
With  luck  we  might  get  a  considerable 
start.’ 

‘But  you  won’t  have  any  luck  in  the  Old  Forest,’  objected 
Fredegar.
He 
looked  towards  the  mountains  and  held  up  his  sword.
Must  have  nap.
To  sheep  other  sheep  no  doubt  appear  different,’ 
laughed  Lindir.
“No  secrets  between  us, 
Frodo,”  he  said;  “but  they  are  not  to  go  any  further.
Already  the  short  afternoon  was  past,  and  a  dim  cloudy 
dusk  was  closing  in.
Speak,  friend,  and  enter.
The  roots  of 
those  mountains  must  be  roots  indeed;  there  must  be  great 
secrets  buried  there  which  have  not  been  discovered  since 
the  beginning.” 

‘So  he  journeyed  by  night  up  into  the  highlands,  and  he 
found  a  little  cave  out  of  which  the  dark  stream  ran;  and  he 
wormed  his  way  like  a  maggot  into  the  heart  of  the  hills, 
and  vanished  out  of  all  knowledge.
Eve 
sent  him  on  to  Bucklebury.
‘Ah!
It  would  be  better 
if  the  Three  had  never  been.
The  hobbits  felt  encouraged,  and  looked  up  hopefully  at 
the  broadening  daylight  in  the  sky.
Gandalf  crept  to 
one  side  of  the  window.
Finish  your  book,  and  leave  the  ending  unaltered!
It 
was  reached  by  a  round  hole  in  the  centre  through  which  the 
ladder  passed.
‘I  don’t  fancy 
he  would  try  bringing  his  horse  down  that  bank,’  said  Sam.
‘At  least  we  may  yet  be  avenged.
His  speech 
and  clear  ringing  voice  left  no  doubt  in  their  hearts:  the  rider 
was  of  the  Elven-folk.
We  do  not.
It  was  not  at  Bag  End.
Noises  of  trumpets  and 
horns,  pipes  and  flutes,  and  other  musical  instruments.
Straight  on,  and  up  the  stair  beyond  the  door!’ 

Arrows  fell  among  them.
There  was  a  horn-blast  and  a  rush 
of  feet,  and  ores  one  after  another  leaped  into  the  chamber.
‘Do  you  think,’  asked  Pippin  hesitatingly,  ‘do  you  think  we 
may  be  pursued,  tonight?’ 

‘No,  I  hope  not  tonight,’  answered  Tom  Bombadil;  ‘nor 
perhaps  the  next  day.
‘He  had  a  friend  called  Deagol,  of  similar  sort,  sharper¬ 
eyed  but  not  so  quick  and  strong.
And  only  last  night  you 
said  to  yourself:  “Sam,  what  about  a  bit  of  rope?
He  was  cramped  and  miserable,  having  nothing  to  do 
but  stare  at  the  winter-lands  crawling  by  and  the  grey  water 
on  either  side  of  him.
‘I  know.
A  great  weariness  was  on  him,  but 
his  will  was  firm  and  his  heart  lighter.
‘This  is  what  I  feared,’  he  said.
Then  Goldberry  came  and  stood  before 
them,  holding  a  candle;  and  she  wished  them  each  a  good 
night  and  deep  sleep.
It  is  now  more  hopeless  than 
ever  for  the  Company  to  go  east,  since  we  have  been  tracked 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  525 

by  Gollum,  and  must  fear  that  the  secret  of  our  journey  is 
already  betrayed.
‘And  what  has  become  of  Balin  and  Ori  and  Oin?’  asked 
Frodo.
Boner!
‘Fair  lady  Goldberry!’  said  Frodo 
at  last,  feeling  his  heart  moved  with  a  joy  that  he  did  not 
understand.
I  had  just  heard  the  name 
Baggins  before  you  turned  up.
‘He 
looks  more  than  half  like  a  goblin.’ 

Over  the  hedge  another  man  was  staring  boldly.
They  were  clad  in  shadowy- 
grey,  and  could  not  be  seen  among  the  tree-stems,  unless 
they  moved  suddenly.
There  must  be  someone  with  intelligence  in  the  party.’ 

‘Then  you  certainly  will  not  be  chosen,  Peregrin  Took!’ 
said  Gandalf,  looking  in  through  the  window,  which  was  near 
the  ground.
Then  a  wide  river  flowing 
through  a  populous  city.
Every  night,  as  the  Moon  waned  again,  it  shone 
brighter  and  brighter.
Mithrandir ,  Mithrandir  sang  the  Elves,  O  Pilgrim  Grey!
‘And  there  the  Gate  stood  once  upon  a 
time,  the  Elven  Door  at  the  end  of  the  road  from  Hollin  by 
which  we  have  come.
Wretched  fool!
We  hobbits  ought  to 
stick  together,  and  we  will.
A  most  unfortunate 
accident.’ 

‘All  right,  Mr.
Good-bye  now!
I  know  the  Men  of  Rohan,  true  and 


342 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


valiant,  our  allies,  dwelling  still  in  the  lands  that  we  gave  them 
long  ago.’ 

‘The  shadow  of  Mordor  lies  on  distant  lands,’  answered 
Aragorn.
There  ain’t  no  eaves  at  Bag  End,  and  that’s  a  fact.’ 

‘Don’t  be  a  fool!
‘I  have  quick  ears,’  he  went  on, 
lowering  his  voice,  ‘and  though  I  cannot  disappear,  I  have 
hunted  many  wild  and  wary  things  and  I  can  usually  avoid 
being  seen,  if  I  wish.
Frodo  thought  he  heard  the  sound  of  snuffling.
The  gates  were 
closed  at  nightfall;  but  just  inside  them  were  small  lodges  for 
the  gatekeepers.
‘For  I  have  become  very  fond  of 
Strider.
‘ Ai!
We  shall  have 


STRIDER 


225 


a  rough  road  tomorrow.
The  sound  of  running  and  falling 
water  was  loud,  and  the  evening  was  filled  with  a  faint  scent 
of  trees  and  flowers,  as  if  summer  still  lingered  in  Elrond’s 
gardens.
Yet  such  is  oft  the 
course  of  deeds  that  move  the  wheels  of  the  world:  small 
hands  do  them  because  they  must,  while  the  eyes  of  the  great 
are  elsewhere.’ 

‘Very  well,  very  well,  Master  Elrond!’  said  Bilbo  suddenly.
The  sound  of  her  footsteps  was  like  a  stream  falling 
gently  away  downhill  over  cool  stones  in  the  quiet  of  night.
Just  in  time  he  threw  himself  down  in  a  patch  of  long 
grass  behind  a  tree  that  overshadowed  the  road.
That  journey  should  not  prove  too  perilous, 
though  the  Road  is  less  easy  than  it  was,  and  it  will  grow 
worse  as  the  year  fails.’ 

‘Rivendell!’  said  Frodo.
‘Old  knives  are  long  enough  as  swords  for  hobbit-people,’ 
he  said.
‘Sam 
and  Pippin  have  trampled  the  soft  ground,  and  the  marks  are 
spoilt  or  confused.
Concealment  was  no  longer  possible,  and  they  could  only 
hope  that  no  enemy  or  spy  was  observing  them.
Come  with  me,  Frodo,’  he  said.
he  said  in  a  commanding  voice.
Though  I  say  it 
as  shouldn’t,  you  may  think,’  he  added  with  a  wry  smile, 
seeing  Frodo’s  glance.
Fly,  if  you  value  your  foul  skin!
Beneath  them  on  this  southern  side 
there  ran  like  a  ribbon  the  Old  Road,  coming  out  of  the  West 
and  winding  up  and  down,  until  it  faded  behind  a  ridge  of 
dark  land  to  the  east.
Merry  led  them  down  the  passage  and  threw  open  a 
door  at  the  far  end.
I  will  do  all  I  can  to 
help  and  heal  him.
He’ll  end  up  by  becoming  a  wizard  -  or  a  warrior!’ 

‘I  hope  not,’  said  Sam.
Who  invented 
the  stories  anyway?
I 
find  that  I  have  become  rather  unpopular.
It  was  not  made  by 
Saruman,  but  by  the  Men  of  Numenor  long  ago;  and  it  is 
very  tall  and  has  many  secrets;  yet  it  looks  not  to  be  a  work 
of  craft.
I  will  lead  you  now!’  he  called.
I  never  knew  that.’ 

‘There  was  a  lot  more,’  said  Sam,  ‘all  about  Mordor.
‘Bless  the  old  hobbit!
Though  he  had 
found  out  that  the  thing  needed  looking  after;  it  did  not  seem 
always  of  the  same  size  or  weight;  it  shrank  or  expanded  in 
an  odd  way,  and  might  suddenly  slip  off  a  finger  where  it 
had  been  tight.’ 

‘Yes,  he  warned  me  of  that  in  his  last  letter,’  said  Frodo, 
‘so  I  have  always  kept  it  on  its  chain.’ 

‘Very  wise,’  said  Gandalf.
She  spoke  no  word, 
but  beckoned  to  them.
Mr.
Frodo  looked  up  at  the  sky.
The  Dark  Tower  was  broken,  but  its  foundations  were  not 
removed;  for  they  were  made  with  the  power  of  the  Ring, 
and  while  it  remains  they  will  endure.
It  was  not  called  the  Old  Forest 
without  reason,  for  it  was  indeed  ancient,  a  survivor  of  vast 
forgotten  woods;  and  in  it  there  lived  yet,  ageing  no  quicker 
than  the  hills,  the  fathers  of  the  fathers  of  trees,  remembering 
times  when  they  were  lords.
The  banks  of  the 
stream  sank,  as  it  reached  the  levels  and  became  broader  and 
shallower,  wandering  off  towards  the  Marish  and  the  River.
Mordor  draws  all 
wicked  things,  and  the  Dark  Power  was  bending  all  its  will  to 
gather  them  there.
He  knows  something,  that’s  plain,  and 
more  than  I  like;  but  it’s  no  reason  why  we  should  let  him 
go  leading  us  out  into  some  dark  place  far  from  help,  as  he 
puts  it.’ 

Pippin  fidgeted  and  looked  uncomfortable.
Frodo,  or  not  at  all,’  he  said.
Eastward 
he  looked  into  wide  uncharted  lands,  nameless  plains,  and 
forests  unexplored.
‘Ah,  but  he  has  likely  enough  been  adding  to  what  he 
brought  at  first,’  argued  the  miller,  voicing  common  opinion.
‘But  the  explanation 
is  simple:  I  was  looking  for  a  Hobbit  called  Frodo  Baggins.
‘And 
a  nice  place  to  choose,  too.
‘Though  other  folks  besides  hobbits  ask 
riddles,  and  of  much  the  same  sort.
Yet  at  last, 
as  his  shadow  grew,  Saruman  yielded,  and  the  Council  put 
forth  its  strength  and  drove  the  evil  out  of  Mirkwood  -  and 
that  was  in  the  very  year  of  the  finding  of  this  Ring:  a  strange 
chance,  if  chance  it  was.
I  did  not  creep  any 
closer,  because  I  began  to  tremble  all  over.
‘Hullo!’  said  Bilbo.
Its  dark  hurrying  waters  ran  across 


LOTHLORIEN  44 1 

the  path  before  them,  and  joined  the  Silverlode  in  a  swirl  of 
dim  pools  among  the  roots  of  trees.
‘Well,  that  was  years  ago.
The  feeling 
steadily  grew,  until  they  found  themselves  looking  up  quickly, 
or  glancing  back  over  their  shoulders,  as  if  they  expected  a 
sudden  blow.
And  underneath 
small  and  faint  is  written:  I,  Narvi,  made  them.
1 84  THE  fellowship  of  the  ring 

Suddenly  a  song  began:  a  cold  murmur,  rising  and  falling.
The 
wind  murmured  in  the  branches  of  the  trees.
‘For  where  am  I  to  go?
But  if  the  passages  of  the  River  should  be  won, 
what  then?
At  the  far  side  of  the  glade 
there  was  a  break  in  the  wall  of  trees,  and  a  clear  path  beyond 
it.
For  we  see  that  there  is  some  shadow  of  fear  upon  you.’ 

‘O  Wise  People!’  interrupted  Pippin  eagerly.
His  legs  ached.
But  however  it  may  be 
with  the  guide,  the  followers  are  blameless.
He  is  a  friend  of  Merry’s,  and  I 
used  to  come  here  with  him  a  good  deal  at  one  time.’ 

They  went  along  the  lane,  until  they  saw  the  thatched  roofs 
of  a  large  house  and  farm-buildings  peeping  out  among  the 
trees  ahead.
Frodo  halted.
Nothing  is  decided  yet.’ 

‘Nothing  decided!’  cried  Pippin.
They  rode  off  along  a  path  that  wound  away  from  behind 
the  house,  and  went  slanting  up  towards  the  north  end  of  the 
hill-brow  under  which  it  sheltered.
They  will  come  on  you  in  the  wild,  in  some  dark  place 
where  there  is  no  help.
I  couldn’t  swear  to  it,  but 
it  looked  to  me  as  if  two  men  was  stooping  over  something, 
lifting  it.
Other  rings  there  may  be,  less  treacherous, 
that  might  be  used  in  our  need.
derry  dol!
He  had  imagined  himself  meeting  giants  taller  than  trees,  and 
other  creatures  even  more  terrifying,  some  time  or  other  in  the 
course  of  his  journey;  but  at  the  moment  he  was  finding  his 
first  sight  of  Men  and  their  tall  houses  quite  enough,  indeed 
too  much  for  the  dark  end  of  a  tiring  day.
But  you  must  admit  that  it  was  very  intriguing,  and 
I  was  only  in  my  teens.
You  will  have  to  do  without  light  for  a  while:  I  am  rather 
shaken.
Some  of  the  hobbits  had  similar  names.
The  storm  had 
troubled  him  little,  and  he  alone  of  the  Company  remained 
still  light  of  heart.
‘Yet  we  must  needs 
make  up  our  minds  without  his  aid.
They  had  not  seen  the  Lord  and  Lady  again,  and  they  had 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL 


467 


little  speech  with  the  Elven-folk;  for  few  of  these  knew  or 
would  use  the  Westron  tongue.
The  Ring  is  another: 
you  are  the  Ring-bearer.
I  will  explain 
later.’ 

‘It  seemed  to  make  off  up  the  Road,  eastward,’  continued 
Merry.
Give  it  to  me!’ 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  5 21 

Frodo  did  not  answer,  but  moved  away  till  the  great  flat 
stone  stood  between  them.
I  cannot  get  a  wink, 
so  I  may  as  well  do  the  watching.’ 

‘I  know  what  is  the  matter  with  me,’  he  muttered,  as  he  sat 
down  by  the  door.
He  is  a  strong  king,  and  his  realm  now 
reaches  far  south  and  east  of  Esgaroth.’ 

‘And  what  of  your  own  people?’  asked  Frodo.
‘He  could  write  well  and  speedily,  and  often 
used  the  Elvish  characters.’ 

‘I  fear  he  had  ill  tidings  to  record  in  a  fair  hand,’  said 
Gandalf.
It  need  not  be  said  that 
I  refused  to  listen.
There  is  in  her  and  in  this  land 
no  evil,  unless  a  man  bring  it  hither  himself.
‘One  can  meet  them  some¬ 
times  in  the  Woody  End.
On  the  further 
side  was  a  steep  brown  bank,  threaded  by  a  winding  path; 
and  behind  that  the  tall  mountains  climbed,  shoulder  above 
shoulder,  and  peak  beyond  peak,  into  the  fading  sky.
‘It  is  too  distant  to  make 
out.
‘And  I’ve  heard  tell  that  Elves  are  moving  west.
The  ferry-boat  moved  slowly  across  the  water.
I  fear  to  take 
the  Ring  to  hide  it.
They  shall  judge  you,  to  hold  you  or  to  give  you  leave, 
as  they  will.
Tiniwiel!
I  doubt  now  that  Balin 
ever  came  here.’ 

After  they  had  breakfasted  Gandalf  decided  to  go  on  again 
at  once.
Deagol  ought  to  have  given 
the  ring  to  him.
The  world  seemed  to  have  shrunk  and 
fallen  silent.
He  lay  forward  peering  into  the  gloom.
They  jumped  over  the 
low  place  in  the  hedge  at  the  bottom  and  took  to  the  fields, 
passing  into  the  darkness  like  a  rustle  in  the  grasses.
Three  cheers  for  Captain  Frodo  and 
company!’  they  shouted;  and  they  danced  round  him.
Then  suddenly  his  visits  had  ceased.
Thither,  eastward,  unwilling  his  eye  was  drawn.
“Now  I  can  take  a  night’s  rest,  the  first  since  I  have  forgot¬ 
ten  when.” 

‘So  I  stayed  there  that  night,  wondering  much  what  had 
become  of  the  Riders;  for  only  of  two  had  there  yet  been  any 


344 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


news  in  Bree,  it  seemed.
The  kitchen  was  lit  with  candles  and  the  fire 
was  mended.
Old  Man  Willow!’ 

Setting  down  his  lilies  carefully  on  the  grass,  he  ran  to  the 
tree.
As 
soon  as  I  had  made  up  my  mind,  I  was  ready  to  tell  you 
whatever  you  asked.
‘Welcome  Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn!’  he  said.
‘I  am  sure  you  have  given  me  all  the  heaviest  stuff,’  said 
Frodo.
If  you 
want  to  know,  there  is  supposed  to  be  a  plot  between  you 
and  me  to  get  hold  of  his  wealth.’ 

‘Some  people!’  exclaimed  Frodo.
For  all  I  knew  I 
had  to  persuade  you  to  trust  me  without  proofs,  if  I  was  to 
help  you.
Quickly  he  returned,  bearing  a  large  and  laden  tray.
For  in  that  time  he  was  not  yet  evil  to  behold,  and  they 
received  his  aid  and  grew  mighty  in  craft,  whereas  he  learned 
all  their  secrets,  and  betrayed  them,  and  forged  secretly  in 
the  Mountain  of  Fire  the  One  Ring  to  be  their  master.
He  is  his  own  master.
Sheer  rose  the  dreadful  cliffs  to  unguessed  heights  on  either 
side.
I  am  just  going  to  saddle  the  ponies, 
and  fetch  the  one  that  is  to  be  the  baggage-carrier.
I  have  thought  so 
often,  since  we  first  entered  Moria.’ 

Gimli  halted  and  stooped  to  the  ground.
‘I  do  not  know  what  you  mean  by  that,’  answered  the 
leader  of  the  Elves.
‘I  can  see  no  sign  of 
the  enemy,’  he  said,  ‘and  I  wonder  very  much  what  that 
means.
‘It’s 
no  good,’  he  heard  Merry  saying.
‘And  some 
are  large  and  evil:  black  Uruks  of  Mordor.
But  these  things  it  is  the  part  of  Gandalf  to  make 
clear;  and  I  call  upon  him  last,  for  it  is  the  place  of  honour, 
and  in  all  this  matter  he  has  been  the  chief.’ 

‘Some,  Galdor,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘would  think  the  tidings  of 
Gloin,  and  the  pursuit  of  Frodo,  proof  enough  that  the 
halfling’s  trove  is  a  thing  of  great  worth  to  the  Enemy.
We  hope  that  they  were  all  unhorsed  and  unmasked, 


356 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


and  so  made  for  a  while  less  dangerous;  but  we  must  find  out 
for  certain.
Though  he 
was  getting  restless  and  uneasy.
There  was  a  sudden  deep  silence,  in  which  Frodo  could 
hear  his  heart  beating.
/ 
don’t  know ,  says  he;  but  he  wasn’t  a  hobbit.
‘Caradhras  has  not 
forgiven  us,’  he  said.
You  did  not  see,  but  that  Black  Rider  stopped  just  here 
and  was  actually  crawling  towards  us  when  the  song  began.
Suddenly  he  stopped  and  waved 
his  arms.
‘One  thing  drives  out  another,  so  to 
speak.
‘I  knew 
much  and  I  have  learned  much,’  he  answered.
He  sounded  almost  as  if  he  was 
scared ,  if  that  is  possible.’ 

We  have  all  been  scared,’  said  Pippin  after  a  pause,  in 
which  Frodo  stared  at  the  fire  and  did  not  speak.
‘I  hardly  feel  that  I 
have  moved  at  all.’ 


132 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


The  travellers  hung  up  their  cloaks,  and  piled  their  packs  on 
the  floor.
And  such  a  course  may  be  more 
perilous  than  it  sounds.
The  Wood-elves  have  him  in  prison,  but  they  treat  him  with 
such  kindness  as  they  can  find  in  their  wise  hearts.’ 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


79 


‘All  the  same,’  said  Frodo,  ‘even  if  Bilbo  could  not  kill 
Gollum,  I  wish  he  had  not  kept  the  Ring.
Mayhap  the  Sword-that- 
was-Broken  may  still  stem  the  tide  -  if  the  hand  that  wields 
it  has  inherited  not  an  heirloom  only,  but  the  sinews  of  the 
Kings  of  Men.’ 

Who  can  tell?’  said  Aragorn.
On  September  20th  two  covered  carts  went  off  laden  to 
Buckland,  conveying  the  furniture  and  goods  that  Frodo  had 
not  sold  to  his  new  home,  by  way  of  the  Brandywine 
Bridge.
He  seemed  capable  of  an  endless  stream  of  talk,  however 
busy  he  might  be.
I  have  heard  of 
strange  doings  in  this  land,  but  I  have  seldom  heard  of  a 
hobbit  sleeping  out  of  doors  under  a  tree.
He  gave  a  final  wave  of  his 
hand,  and  walked  off  at  a  surprising  pace;  but  Frodo  thought 
the  old  wizard  looked  unusually  bent,  almost  as  if  he  was 
carrying  a  great  weight.
These  Rings  have  a  way  of  being  found.
Fog  still 
hung  in  veils  upon  the  crumbling  rock-wall,  and  to  their 
left  mist  shrouded  the  River:  they  could  hear  it  rushing  and 
foaming  over  the  sharp  shelves  and  stony  teeth  of  Sarn  Gebir, 
but  they  could  not  see  it.
The  Ring-bearer’s  voice  surely  should  be 
heard?’ 

‘I  do  not  wish  to  go  to  Moria,’  said  Legolas.
‘Alas  for  us  all!
With  a  shout  Sam 
raced  across  the  grass.
He  can  spare  a  share  for  a  poor  old  troll, 

For  he  don’t  need  his  shinbone.’ 

Said  Tom:  7  don’t  see  why  the  likes  o’  thee 
Without  axin’  leave  should  go  makin’  free 
With  the  shank  or  the  shin  o’  my  father’s  kin; 

So  hand  the  old  bone  over!
They 
had  climbed  on  to  a  narrow  saddle  between  two  higher  points, 
and  the  land  fell  steeply  away  again,  only  a  short  distance 
ahead.
Yeni  ve  linte  yuldar  avanier 
mi  oromardi  lisse-miruvoreva 
Andurie  pella,  Vardo  tellumar 
nil  luini  yassen  tintilar  i  eleni 
omaryo  airetdri-lirinen.
‘He  would  get  all  right  in  time,  wouldn’t 
he?
Elves  may  thrive  on  speech  alone,  and  Dwarves  endure  great 
weariness;  but  I  am  only  an  old  hobbit,  and  I  miss  my  meal 
at  noon.
‘Why  not?’ 

But  Tom  shook  his  head,  saying:  ‘You’ve  found  your¬ 
selves  again,  out  of  the  deep  water.
You’ll  be  wanting  supper,  I  don’t  doubt.
Then  he 
shut  and  locked  the  door.
That  night  they  camped  on  a  stony  shelf  with  a  rock-wall 
behind  them,  in  which  there  was  a  shallow  cave,  a  mere  scoop 
in  the  cliff.
There  was  no  sign  of  the  Riders.
It  became  difficult  to  follow  the  path,  and  they  were  very 
tired.
After  he  has  come  so  far  and 
all!’ 

‘I  am  sorry,  Sam,’  said  the  wizard.
‘Paddle!
‘Get  up,  Sam!’  said 
Gandalf.
Fly!’  Aragorn  and  Boromir  did  not  heed  the  command, 
but  still  held  their  ground,  side  by  side,  behind  Gandalf  at 
the  far  end  of  the  bridge.
It  has  now  come  to  the  final  point.
After  a  while  he  spoke 
again.
Frodo  was  in  the  water  close 
to  the  edge,  and  a  great  tree-root  seemed  to  be  over  him  and 
holding  him  down,  but  he  was  not  struggling.
It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the 
Ores  will  be  content  with  driving  us  from  Moria.
And  of  old  it  was  not  darksome, 
but  full  of  light  and  splendour,  as  is  still  remembered  in  our 
songs.’ 

He  rose  and  standing  in  the  dark  he  began  to  chant  in  a 
deep  voice,  while  the  echoes  ran  away  into  the  roof.
It  would  destroy  you.
After  half  an  hour  Pippin  said:  ‘I  hope  we  have  not  turned 
too  much  towards  the  south,  and  are  not  walking  longwise 
through  this  wood!
Pippin,’  said  Sam.
They  don’t  live  in  the  Shire,  but 
they  wander  into  it  in  spring  and  autumn,  out  of  their  own 
lands  away  beyond  the  Tower  Hills.
At  these  words  there  was  a  cry  and  part  of  the  inner  end 
of  the  chamber  fell  in  with  a  crash.
His  face 
looked  grim  and  sad.
It’s  not  his  now,  but  mine.
FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


493 


Maybe  thou  shalt  find  Valimar.
‘But  I  wasn’t  worrying  about  that.
And  he  doesn’t  like  to  ask  anyone  to  go  with  him, 
poor  old  fellow.
Then  suddenly  he 
knew  that  he  was  imprisoned,  caught  hopelessly;  he  was  in  a 
barrow.
‘I  thank  you  indeed,  Gildor 
Inglorion,’  said  Frodo  bowing.
He  thought  as  little  as  possible  about  the  Ring,  and 
where  it  might  lead  him  in  the  end.
They  sing  them  occasionally:  just  to  please 
me,  I  think;  for,  of  course,  they  aren’t  really  good  enough  for 
Rivendell.
But  I  should  feel  happier  if  I  knew  you  were  wearing  it.
So  heavy  that  none  could  lay  it 
on  another.
Frodo 
Baggins,’  he  said.
‘If  Gondor,  Boromir,  has  been  a  stalwart  tower,  we  have 
played  another  part.
You  may  be  glad  to  grant  it,  when 
you  have  heard  me.’ 

‘Go  on  then!’  said  Frodo.
You 
follow  after  me  as  quick  as  you  are  able!’  With  that  he  picked 
up  his  lilies,  and  then  with  a  beckoning  wave  of  his  hand 
went  hopping  and  dancing  along  the  path  eastward,  still 
singing  loudly  and  nonsensically.
These  he  took  off  and  put  in  the  chimney-corner.
His  three  companions  were  bend¬ 
ing  over  him.
‘Gandalf  was  our  guide,  and  he  led  us  through  Moria; 
and  when  our  escape  seemed  beyond  hope  he  saved  us,  and 
he  fell.’ 

‘Tell  us  now  the  full  tale!’  said  Celeborn.
Behind  him  they  walked  in  file,  threading  their  way  with  care, 
for  under  the  weedy  pools  were  sliding  and  greasy  stones, 
and  footing  was  treacherous.
‘You  are  the  master  of  Bag  End  now.
‘But  I  miss  something.
Why  couldn’t  he  stop 
talking  and  let  them  drink  his  health?
Sam,  clinging  to  Frodo’s  arm,  collapsed  on  a  step  in  the  black 
darkness.
‘Fly!’  he  called.
‘Then  you 
two  shall  go  into  a  corner  and  finish  your  task,  and  we  will 
hear  it  and  judge  it  before  we  end  our  merrymaking.’  Messen¬ 
gers  were  sent  to  find  Bilbo’s  friend,  though  none  knew  where 
he  was,  or  why  he  had  not  been  present  at  the  feast.
Its  worth  was  ten  times  that  of 
gold,  and  now  it  is  beyond  price;  for  little  is  left  above  ground, 
and  even  the  Ores  dare  not  delve  here  for  it.
Give  me  that  basket!’  said  Merry,  and 
rode  ahead  into  the  darkness.
Then  he  threw  his  staff  on  the  ground,  and  sat  down 
in  silence.
And  now  he  is  withdrawn  into  a  little  land,  within  bounds 
that  he  has  set,  though  none  can  see  them,  waiting  perhaps 
for  a  change  of  days,  and  he  will  not  step  beyond  them.’ 

‘But  within  those  bounds  nothing  seems  to  dismay  him,’ 
said  Erestor.
I  was  pierced  with  cold,  and  I  had  but 
little  room  in  which  to  pace  to  and  fro,  brooding  on  the 
coming  of  the  Riders  to  the  North.
But  if  you  ask  me, 
Elrond  will  send  out  a  fair  number,  when  the  reports  come 
in.
‘All  together,  paddle!’  shouted  Boromir.
I  think  we  will  rest  here,  not  only  today  but 
tonight  as  well.
Bilbo  put  it  on  him, 
and  fastened  Sting  upon  the  glittering  belt;  and  then  Frodo 


362 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


put  over  the  top  his  old  weather-stained  breeches,  tunic,  and 
jacket.
It  would  quite  spoil  the  joke.’ 

‘Indeed  it  would  take  away  the  only  point  I  ever  saw  in  the 
affair,’  said  Gandalf.
I  could  hardly  help  myself.
Then 
far  below,  as  if  the  stone  had  fallen  into  deep  water  in  some 
cavernous  place,  there  came  a  plunk ,  very  distant,  but  magni¬ 
fied  and  repeated  in  the  hollow  shaft.
Boromir  laughed.
A  large  flat  ferry¬ 
boat  was  moored  beside  it.
And  now  that 
part  of  the  tale  that  I  shall  tell  is  drawn  to  its  close.
But  there  is  such 
a  crowd  already  in  the  house  tonight  as  there  hasn’t  been  for 
long  enough.
But  soon  Haldir  turned  aside  into  the  trees  and  halted  on  the 
bank  of  the  river  under  their  shadows.
A 
shadow  seemed  to  pass  over  the  high  sun,  and  the  porch  for 
a  moment  grew  dark.
My  heart  trembles  at  the  thought 
that  I  may  see  them  soon.’ 

‘May  you  have  joy  of  the  sight,  my  good  dwarf!’  said 
Gandalf.
“See,  lads,”  he  said, 
“next  time  this  young  varmint  sets  foot  on  my  land,  you  can 
eat  him.
Hold  it  up,  and  then  Boromir  will  understand 
the  remainder  of  his  riddle.’ 

There  was  a  hush,  and  all  turned  their  eyes  on  Frodo.
They  went  down  the  slope,  and  across 
the  stream  where  it  dived  under  the  road,  and  up  the  next 
slope,  and  up  and  down  another  shoulder  of  the  hills;  and  by 
that  time  their  cloaks,  blankets,  water,  food,  and  other  gear 
already  seemed  a  heavy  burden.
‘These  leaves,’  he  said,  ‘I  have  walked  far  to  find;  for 
this  plant  does  not  grow  in  the  bare  hills;  but  in  the  thickets 
away  south  of  the  Road  I  found  it  in  the  dark  by  the  scent 
of  its  leaves.’  He  crushed  a  leaf  in  his  fingers,  and  it  gave  out 
a  sweet  and  pungent  fragrance.
‘Or,  well,  to 
have  it  destroyed.
A  friendly 
light  streamed  out.
You  have  perceived  my  thought 
more  clearly  than  many  that  are  accounted  wise.
But  of  that  perilous  land  we  have 
heard  in  Gondor,  and  it  is  said  that  few  come  out  who  once 
go  in;  and  of  that  few  none  have  escaped  unscathed.’ 

‘Say  not  unscathed ,  but  if  you  say  unchanged ,  then  maybe 
you  will  speak  the  truth,’  said  Aragorn.
That  would  be  a  most  unusual 
ornament  for  a  live  troll!’ 

They  all  laughed.
You  and  Pippin  know  your  way;  so  I’ll  just  ride 
on  and  tell  Fatty  Bolger  that  you  are  coming.
Begging  your 
pardon,  but  he  said  it,  not  me.’ 

‘He  said  it?
The  Lady  ended  her  song  and  greeted  them.
Bilbo  believed  that  she  had 
acquired  a  good  many  of  his  spoons,  while  he  was  away  on 
his  former  journey.
The  hobbits  thought  of  the  soft  light  of  sunset 
glancing  through  the  cheerful  windows  of  Bag  End  far  away.
In  any  case  we  are  in  great  peril  here  after  dark,  since  the 
attack  of  last  night,  and  we  can  hardly  meet  greater  danger 
wherever  we  go.’ 

As  soon  as  the  daylight  was  full,  they  had  some  hurried 
food  and  packed.
Four  hundred  leagues 
I  reckoned  it,  and  it  took  me  many  months;  for  I  lost  my 
horse  at  Tharbad,  at  the  fording  of  the  Greyflood.
There  was  a  black  look  in  the  sky,  and  the  sun  was  wan.
We  must  go  round  to  the  southern 
side,  and  the  way  is  not  short,  for  the  city  is  great.’ 

There  was  a  road  paved  with  white  stone  running  on  the 
outer  brink  of  the  fosse.
Even  when  the  paddles  were  in  use 
they  did  not  trust  Sam  with  one.
‘I  hope  it  will 
suit.
At  first  they  felt  afraid,  away  from  the  shelter  of  the  wood.
A  draught  of  cooks,  from  every  inn  and  eating-house  for 
miles  around,  arrived  to  supplement  the  dwarves  and  other 
odd  folic  that  were  quartered  at  Bag  End.
‘Now  at  last  the  hour  has  come 
that  you  have  wished  for,  Frodo,’  he  said.
At  the  same  moment  the 
black  horses  leaped  down  the  hill  in  pursuit,  and  from 
the  Riders  came  a  terrible  cry,  such  as  Frodo  had  heard  filling 
the  woods  with  horror  in  the  Eastfarthing  far  away.
Then  Minas 
Anor  was  named  anew  Minas  Tirith,  the  Tower  of  Guard; 
and  these  two  cities  were  ever  at  war,  but  Osgiliath  which  lay 
between  was  deserted  and  in  its  ruins  shadows  walked.
No  cry  came  from  him.
A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS  113 

I  don’t  want  to  answer  a  string  of  questions  while  I  am  eating.
You  will  have 
to  leave  the  open  road  after  tonight;  for  the  horsemen  will 
watch  it  night  and  day.
Let  him  now  speak!’ 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


325 


Then,  less  willingly  than  Bilbo,  Frodo  told  of  all  his  deal¬ 
ings  with  the  Ring  from  the  day  that  it  passed  into  his  keeping.
We  will  go,  and  may  the  others  find  a  safe  road!
There  was  a  tall  red 
chimney  nearby.
‘Did  you  not  hear  what  I  told  you  of 
Saruman?
There  are  five  ponies  in  a  stable  across  the  fields;  stores 
and  tackle  are  all  packed,  except  for  a  few  extra  clothes,  and 
the  perishable  food.’ 

‘It  seems  to  have  been  a  very  efficient  conspiracy,’  said 
Frodo.
‘You  seem  to  have  a  lot  of  names.’ 

‘Well,  Strider  is  one  that  I  haven’t  heard  before,  anyway,’ 
said  Bilbo.
On  the  slab  runes  were 
deeply  graven: 


khm 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


417 


‘These  are  Daeron’s  Runes,  such  as  were  used  of  old  in 
Moria,’  said  Gandalf.
‘But  why  should  we  be?’  he  asked.
And  then  I  made  a  great 
mistake.
It  was  cold  but  its  touch  was  clean,  and  as 
he  went  on  and  it  mounted  to  his  knees,  he  felt  that  the  stain 
of  travel  and  all  weariness  was  washed  from  his  limbs.
‘And  you  would  die  first,  unless  you  are  made  of 
sterner  stuff  than  you  look  to  be.’ 

Pippin  subsided;  but  Sam  was  not  daunted,  and  he  still 
eyed  Strider  dubiously.
Pippin  afterwards  recalled  little  of  either  food  or  drink,  for 
his  mind  was  filled  with  the  light  upon  the  elf-faces,  and  the 
sound  of  voices  so  various  and  so  beautiful  that  he  felt  in  a 
waking  dream.
He  seldom  left  it  unguarded.
I  suspect  you  have  taken  more 
than  your  share,  Sam,  and  I  shall  look  into  it  at  our  next 
packing.’  He  picked  up  his  stick  again.
Frodo  became  aware 
that  all  was  very  quiet,  inside  and  outside.
There  is  naught  that  you  can  do,  other  than 
to  resist,  with  hope  or  without  it.
Frodo  breathed  again.
At  the  top  of  the 
bank  the  horse  halted  and  turned  about  neighing  fiercely.
‘Jumped  over  the  Moon!’  chuckled  Merry  as  he  rolled  him¬ 
self  in  his  blanket.
Gandalf 
snuffed  the  air  and  looked  back.
Let  us  sing  together!
Whether  it  was  set  there,  or  let  fall 
by  chance,  I  cannot  say;  but  it  brings  hope  to  me.
‘They’re  mine!’  said  Frodo.
I  am  not  made  for  perilous  quests.
Suddenly  Frodo  laughed: 
from  the  covered  basket  he  held,  the  scent  of  mushrooms 
was  rising.
Deep  in  their  forest  the  trees  are  very  great.
Then  coming  up, 
close  to  the  stem,  Frodo  saw  two  pale  eyes.
Elrond  drew  Frodo  to  a  seat  by  his  side,  and  presented 
him  to  the  company,  saying: 

‘Here,  my  friends,  is  the  hobbit,  Frodo  son  of  Drogo.
His  round  eyes 
were  wide  open  -  for  he  was  looking  across  lands  he  had 
never  seen  to  a  new  horizon.
‘What  do  you  mean?’  asked  Pippin,  looking  at  him,  half 
puzzled  and  half  amused.
‘You  are 
a  wise  beast,  and  have  learned  much  in  Rivendell.
‘I  have  never  seen  them.
‘I  am  too 
weary  to  decide,’  he  said,  shaking  his  head.
That  was  not  then  his  name.
‘They  seem  to 
have  made  a  last  stand  by  both  doors,’  he  said;  ‘but  there 
were  not  many  left  by  that  time.
He  turned  swiftly.
THE  OLD  FOREST  155 

‘I  suppose  we  haven’t  got  an  axe  among  our  luggage,  Mr.
Underhill,  if  any 
name  must  be  given.’ 

They  now  mounted  their  ponies  and  rode  off  silently  into 
the  evening.
The  Wargs  have 
come  west  of  the  Mountains!’ 

‘Need  we  wait  until  morning  then?’  said  Gandalf.
It  was  long  and  oval, 
shaped  like  a  great  spear-head  thrust  deep  into  the  northern 
glen;  but  its  southern  end  was  beyond  the  shadows  under  the 


434 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


sunlit  sky.
Even  now  he  heard  it.
‘It  was  quite  unintentional,  I  assure  you.
‘I  had  not  overlooked  them,  and  they  shall  be 
answered.
The  vision  melted  into  waking;  and  there  was  Tom  whist¬ 
ling  like  a  tree-full  of  birds;  and  the  sun  was  already  slanting 
down  the  hill  and  through  the  open  window.
‘Known?’  said  Gandalf.
He  gave  a  cry  of  dismay 
and  fear.
And  long  listening’s  hungry  work,  morning,  noon, 
and  evening!’  With  that  he  jumped  out  of  his  chair,  and  with 
a  bound  took  a  candle  from  the  chimney-shelf  and  lit  it  in 
the  flame  that  Goldberry  held;  then  he  danced  about  the 
table.
Twenty  other  arms  came  rippling  out.
Already  the  sun  was 
westering.
They  were  sipping  their  favourite  drinks,  and  nibbling  at  their 
favourite  dainties,  and  their  fears  were  forgotten.
Fatty  Bolger  was  still  yawning.
Though  I 

don’t  know  what  the  likes  of  me  can  do  against,  against - ’ 

he  faltered.
Long  she  had  been  in  the  land  of  her  mother’s  kin,  in  Lorien 
beyond  the  mountains,  and  was  but  lately  returned  to  Riven- 
dell  to  her  father’s  house.
I  hear  the  endless  voice 
of  Rauros  calling.’ 

The  Company  rested  now  for  a  while,  drifting  south  on 
the  current  that  flowed  through  the  middle  of  the  lake.
No  cheers.
Poor  Balin!
I’m  a  busy  man.
Underhill.
Frodo  felt  his  chin  go  down  and  his  head  nod.
So  all  this 
feasting  is  in  your  honour,  I  hear.
The  maker.
Often  we  let  him  mount  up  to  the  highest 
branches,  until  he  felt  the  free  wind;  but  we  set  a  guard  at 
the  tree’s  foot.
That  house  was,  as  Bilbo  had  long  ago  reported,  ‘a 
perfect  house,  whether  you  like  food  or  sleep  or  story-telling 
or  singing,  or  just  sitting  and  thinking  best,  or  a  pleasant 
mixture  of  them  all’.
At  the  bottom  there  was  a  level  space  through  which  the 
stream  flowed  noisily  over  shining  pebbles.
‘From  Mordor,  Barliman,  if  that  means  anything  to  you.’ 

‘Save  us!’  cried  Mr.
He  caught  me  several 
times  trespassing  after  mushrooms,  when  I  was  a  youngster 
at  Brandy  Hall.
‘But  the  Company  shall  all  fare  alike.
I  was  going  to  say:  after  a  bit  of 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS 


125 


supper,  I’ll  get  out  a  small  waggon,  and  I’ll  drive  you  all  to 
the  Ferry.
‘If  the  Ring  is  to  set 
out,  it  must  go  soon.
But  he  remembered  that  there  was  bread, 
surpassing  the  savour  of  a  fair  white  loaf  to  one  who  is  starv¬ 
ing;  and  fruits  sweet  as  wildberries  and  richer  than  the  tended 


io8 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


fruits  of  gardens;  he  drained  a  cup  that  was  filled  with  a 
fragrant  draught,  cool  as  a  clear  fountain,  golden  as  a  summer 
afternoon.
But  their  tolls  are  high,’  he 
added  with  a  shake  of  his  head;  ‘and  like  Beorn  of  old  they 
are  not  over  fond  of  dwarves.
I  wish  you’d  take  his  Ring.
Tom  has  his  house  to  mind,  and  Goldberry  is  waiting!
‘I  will.’  Then  he 
shrugged  his  shoulders,  and  smiled  rather  ruefully.
‘Indeed  in  nothing  is  the 
power  of  the  Dark  Lord  more  clearly  shown  than  in  the 
estrangement  that  divides  all  those  who  still  oppose  him.
I  need  you  both.
Two  elves  clad  in  white  steered  it  with  black  paddles.
We  ride  before  the  break  of  day!
They 
gave  themselves  up  to  the  spell  and  fell  fast  asleep  at  the  foot 
of  the  great  grey  willow.
For  nothing  is 
evil  in  the  beginning.
‘I  do  not  know  of  anything  else  that  could  have  hindered 
him,  except  the  Enemy  himself,’  said  Strider.
But  most 
of  the  folk  of  the  old  Shire  regarded  the  Bucklanders  as 
peculiar,  half  foreigners  as  it  were.
He  knows  that  it  is  not  one 


78 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


of  the  Three,  for  they  have  never  been  lost,  and  they  endure 
no  evil.
When  it  grew  foggy  I  came  across  and  rode  up 
towards  Stock  to  see  if  you  had  fallen  in  any  ditches.
Four 
days  passed,  without  the  ground  or  the  scene  changing 
much,  except  that  behind  them  Weathertop  slowly  sank,  and 
before  them  the  distant  mountains  loomed  a  little  nearer.
On  the  far  side 
Merry  and  Pippin  were  set  down,  and  there  they  waited  with 
Legolas  for  the  rest  of  the  Company  to  arrive.
Already  they  were  getting  used  to  much  walking  on 
short  commons  -  shorter  at  any  rate  than  what  in  the  Shire 
they  would  have  thought  barely  enough  to  keep  them  on  their 
legs.
Still  there  are  dangerous  places  even  before  we  come 
there:  rocks  and  stony  eyots  in  the  stream.
He  felt  no  doubt 
that  Bilbo  knew  quite  well.
I  found  this,  and  I’m  going 
to  keep  it.” 

‘  “Oh,  are  you  indeed,  my  love,”  said  Smeagol;  and  he 
caught  Deagol  by  the  throat  and  strangled  him,  because  the 
gold  looked  so  bright  and  beautiful.
‘But  do  not 
despise  the  lore  that  has  come  down  from  distant  years;  for 
oft  it  may  chance  that  old  wives  keep  in  memory  word  of 
things  that  once  were  needful  for  the  wise  to  know.’ 

Now  Galadriel  rose  from  the  grass,  and  taking  a  cup  from 
one  of  her  maidens  she  filled  it  with  white  mead  and  gave  it 
to  Celeborn.
‘I  come 
to  you  last  who  are  not  last  in  my  thoughts.
On  it  he 
hung  a  short  sword  in  a  battered  black-leather  scabbard.
At  the  Ford  of  Bruinen  they  left  the  Road  and  turning 
southwards  went  on  by  narrow  paths  among  the  folded  lands.
The  marauding  ores  had  been  waylaid  and 
almost  all  destroyed;  the  remnant  had  fled  westward  towards 
the  mountains,  and  were  being  pursued.
Water  is  fair  that  leaps  on  high 
in  a  fountain  white  beneath  the  sky; 
but  never  did  fountain  sound  so  sweet 
as  splashing  Hot  Water  with  my  feet!
‘Now!’  shouted  Gandalf.
It  is  hardly  possible  to  separate 
you  from  him,  even  when  he  is  summoned  to  a  secret  council 
and  you  are  not.’ 

Sam  sat  down,  blushing  and  muttering.
unless  you  should  at  some  time 
return  hither,  you  must  be  content  with  our  gift.
Smeagol,  who  is 
now  called  Gollum,  has  escaped.’ 

‘Escaped?’  cried  Aragorn.
Heel!’  he  cried.
‘It  is  getting  late,  and  I  don’t  like  this  hole:  it 
makes  my  heart  sink  somehow.’ 

‘Yes,  we  certainly  must  decide  what  to  do  at  once,’ 
answered  Strider,  looking  up  and  considering  the  time  and 
the  weather.
Indeed,  he  at  once  began  to  carry  on 
Bilbo’s  reputation  for  oddity.
But  anyway  he’s  not  in 
this  business.
It  ran  cunningly,  taking  a  line 
that  seemed  chosen  so  as  to  keep  as  much  hidden  as  possible 


242  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

from  the  view,  both  of  the  hill-tops  above  and  of  the  flats  to 
the  west.
O!
You  cannot  take 
this  thing  back.
Now  there  must  be  a  number  of  leaves  missing,  because 
they  begin  to  be  numbered  five,  the  fifth  year  of  the  colony, 
I  suppose.
‘There!’  said  Merry.
Should  I  wait  for  him?’ 

Gildor  was  silent  for  a  moment.
Frodo  stood  near  the  open  door  and  watched 
the  white  chalky  path  turn  into  a  little  river  of  milk  and  go 
bubbling  away  down  into  the  valley.
‘The  passage  on 
this  side  plunges  straight  down  a  stair:  it  plainly  does  not  lead 
back  towards  the  hall.
It  is  some  miles,  but  you  shall  have  rest  at  the  end  of  it, 
and  it  will  shorten  your  journey  tomorrow.’ 

They  now  marched  on  again  in  silence,  and  passed  like 
shadows  and  faint  lights:  for  Elves  (even  more  than  hobbits) 
could  walk  when  they  wished  without  sound  or  footfall.
Yet  in 
some  fashion  they  seemed  to  weave  a  single  dance,  neither 
hindering  the  other,  in  and  out  of  the  room,  and  round  about 
the  table;  and  with  great  speed  food  and  vessels  and  lights 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  1 73 

were  set  in  order.
He  was  to 
have  come  to  Hobbiton  at  the  latest  two  nights  ago;  but  he 
has  never  appeared.
They  will  be  going  on 
for  a  long  time  yet.
Tread 
water  and  don’t  flounder,  or  you’ll  upset  the  boat.
‘It’s  a  beautiful 
morning.’ 

‘What’s  beautiful  about  it?’  said  Pippin,  peering  over  the 
edge  of  his  blanket  with  one  eye.
The  Elves  sat  on  the  grass  and  spoke  together  in  soft  voices; 
they  seemed  to  take  no  further  notice  of  the  hobbits.
Then  there  was  a  pause,  and  after  it  many  swift  scenes 
followed  that  Frodo  in  some  way  knew  to  be  parts  of  a  great 
history  in  which  he  had  become  involved.
The  chamber  was  filled  with  a  soft  light;  its  walls  were 
green  and  silver  and  its  roof  of  gold.
For  it  looks  like  the  shin  o’  my  nuncle  Tim, 

As  should  be  a-lyin ’  in  graveyard.
‘Or  is  it  one  of  your  imitations?
I  saw  a  star  through  your 
fingers.
A  wanderer  escaped  from  night 
to  haven  white  he  came  at  last, 
to  Elvenhome  the  green  and  fair 
where  keen  the  air,  where  pale  as  glass 
beneath  the  Hill  of  Ilmarin 
a-glimmer  in  a  valley  sheer 
the  lamplit  towers  of  Tirion 
are  mirrored  on  the  Shadowmere.
There  was  a  bright  twinkle 
in  it  and  no  sign  of  sleepiness  that  Frodo  could  see.
Clearer  and  nearer  now  the  bells  jingled,  and  clippety-clip 
came  the  quick  trotting  feet.
It 
took  me  nearly  fifteen  days  from  Weathertop,  for  I  could 
not  ride  among  the  rocks  of  the  troll-fells,  and  Shadowfax 
departed.
It 
should  heal  well  when  I  have  tended  it.
Can  you  hear  him  singing?
The  table  was  littered  with  disordered  papers;  rain  was  beat¬ 
ing  on  the  windows.
‘It  is  best  that  it  should  lie  hidden,’  he  answered.
‘  That 
won’t  help  you  much;  it  goes  for  most  hobbits,  Barley ,  he  says  to 
me,’  continued  Mr.
The  travellers  sat  still  without  moving  or 
speaking.
‘No,’  said  Gandalf.
In  those  lands  I  journeyed  once, 
and  many  things  wild  and  strange  I  knew.
‘I  will  go  forward  free,’ 
he  said,  ‘or  I  will  go  back  and  seek  my  own  land,  where  I 
am  known  to  be  true  of  word,  though  I  perish  alone  in  the 
wilderness.’ 

‘You  cannot  go  back,’  said  Haldir  sternly.
If  I  had  got  this  at 
once,  we  might  all  have  been  safe  in  Rivendell  by  now.
For  now  the  Kindler,  Varda,  the  Queen 
of  the  Stars,  from  Mount  Everwhite  has  uplifted  her  hands 
like  clouds,  and  all  paths  are  drowned  deep  in  shadow;  and 
out  of  a  grey  country  darkness  lies  on  the  foaming  waves 
between  us,  and  mist  covers  the  jewels  of  Calacirya  for  ever.
There  was  mist  on  the  River,  and 
white  fog  swathed  the  shore;  the  far  hank  could  not  be  seen.
Yes,  Frodo,  and  not  the  first;  though  I  fear  it  may 
prove  the  worst.
He  called  her  by  her  Elvish  name; 

And  there  she  halted  listening.
The  elf-horse  reared  and  snorted.
There  were  Nine  Riders  at  the  water’s  edge  below,  and 
Frodo’s  spirit  quailed  before  the  threat  of  their  uplifted  faces.
‘Don’t 


MANY  MEETINGS 


289 


be  alarmed!’  said  Gandalf.
Come, 
bind  our  eyes,  Haldir!’ 

‘I  shall  claim  full  amends  for  every  fall  and  stubbed  toe,  if 
you  do  not  lead  us  well,’  said  Gimli  as  they  bound  a  cloth 
about  his  eyes.
But  Smeagol  returned  alone;  and  he  found  that  none 
of  his  family  could  see  him,  when  he  was  wearing  the  ring.
The  star  shone  out  briefly  and  faded  again.
He  would  have  given 
also  an  account  of  his  party  and  disappearance  from  the 
Shire,  if  he  had  been  allowed;  but  Elrond  raised  his  hand.
The  Bree-hobbits  were,  in  fact,  friendly  and  inquisitive, 
and  Frodo  soon  found  that  some  explanation  of  what  he  was 
doing  would  have  to  be  given.
The 
bow  of  Legolas  was  singing.
‘You  at  least  shall  go  with  him.
‘An  hour  since  he  vanished!’  shouted  Sam.
They  found  that  they  were  upon  an  island  in 
the  fog.
I  will  shrivel  you  from  tail  to 
snout,  if  you  come  within  this  ring.’ 

The  wolf  snarled  and  sprang  towards  them  with  a  great 
leap.
“I  have  not  brought  you  hither  to 
be  instructed  by  you,  but  to  give  you  a  choice.” 

‘He  drew  himself  up  then  and  began  to  declaim,  as  if  he 
were  malting  a  speech  long  rehearsed.
Never  mind  about  breakfast:  a  drink  and  a  bite  standing 
will  have  to  do.
The  others  did  not  answer.
‘Ah,  there  you  are  at  last,  Dun- 
adan!’  he  cried.
There  were  four  deep  mattresses,  each  piled  with 
white  blankets,  laid  on  the  floor  along  one  side.
We  will  take  this 
book,  the  Book  of  Mazarbul,  and  look  at  it  more  closely  later.
Here  the  Company  decided  to  stay  and  await  the  dawn:  it 
was  useless  to  attempt  to  move  further  by  night.
The  gold  looked  very  fair  and  pure,  and 
Frodo  thought  how  rich  and  beautiful  was  its  colour,  how 
perfect  was  its  roundness.
Even  so,  I  cannot 
help  feeling  happy;  happier  than  I  have  felt  for  a  long  time.
‘  “Butterbur  they  call  him,”  thought  I.
Then  he  turned,  tossed  up  his  hat,  leaped  on  Lumpkin’s 
back,  and  rode  up  over  the  bank  and  away  singing  into  the 
dusk.
‘Very  well,’  said  Gandalf.
There  was  a  cold  gleam  in  it.
A 
wind  began  to  blow  chill  from  the  Misty  Mountains  to  the 
east.
Pippin  soon  began  to  feel  sleepy,  and  staggered  once  or  twice; 
but  each  time  a  tall  Elf  at  his  side  put  out  his  arm  and  saved 
him  from  a  fall.
he 
shouted,  and  followed  it  with  the  same  command  in  every 
language  that  had  ever  been  spoken  in  the  West  of  Middle- 
earth.
For 
the  moment  most  of  them  took  it  for  granted  that  his 
disappearance  was  nothing  more  than  a  ridiculous  prank.
However,  we  are  certain  of  one  thing  at  any  rate:  it  will 
get  warmer  as  we  get  south.’ 

‘Too  warm,  I  shouldn’t  wonder,’  muttered  Sam  to  Frodo.
‘It  is  getting  hot!’  he  gasped.
There  was,  however,  no  sign  nor  mention  of  money  or  jewel¬ 
lery:  not  a  penny-piece  or  a  glass  bead  was  given  away.
Drink, 
fire,  and  chance-meeting  are  pleasant  enough,  but,  well  -  this 
isn’t  the  Shire.
‘It’s  time  to  close  the 
shop,  Merry,’  he  said.
As  soon  as  the  captain  of 
the  Ringwraiths  rode  into  the  water  the  flood  was  released.
With  a  quick  movement  Gandalf  stepped  before  the  nar¬ 
row  opening  of  the  door  and  thrust  forward  his  staff.
Do  you  know 
who  I  am?
Whatever  we  do  must  be  done  soon.
‘Slow  should  you  be  to  wind  that  horn  again,  Boromir,’ 


364  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

said  Elrond,  ‘until  you  stand  once  more  on  the  borders  of 
your  land,  and  dire  need  is  on  you.’ 

‘Maybe,’  said  Boromir.
‘Hey!
346 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Could  we  not  still  send  messages  to  him  and  obtain  his 
help?’  asked  Erestor.
Fear  no  alder  black!
Nothing  happened.
About  her  feet  in  wide  vessels  of  green  and  brown 
earthenware,  white  water-lilies  were  floating,  so  that  she 
seemed  to  be  enthroned  in  the  midst  of  a  pool.
In  its  right  hand  was  a  blade 
like  a  stabbing  tongue  of  fire;  in  its  left  it  held  a  whip  of  many 
thongs.
And  be  careful  of  what  you  say,  even  to  your 
closest  friends!
Why  do  you  speak 
ever  of  hiding  and  destroying?
Their  thoughts  did  not  go  beyond  that,  except  for  a 
vague  hope  that  perhaps  away  beyond  the  Downs  there  might 
be  no  fog.
A  heavy  weight  was  settling  steadily  on  Frodo’s  heart,  and 
he  regretted  now  with  every  step  forward  that  he  had  ever 
thought  of  challenging  the  menace  of  the  trees.
My  heart  is  glad  to  know  that  you  have 
such  a  coat.
‘I  am  very 
pleased  to  meet  you,  Master  -  Underhill,  if  old  Butterbur  got 
your  name  right.’ 

‘He  did,’  said  Frodo  stiffly.
Pale-blue  sky  peeped  among  the  moving  branches.
Wait  a  moment!
In  the 
midst  upon  a  stony  height  stands  Dol  Guldur,  where  long 
the  hidden  Enemy  had  his  dwelling.
I  can’t  bear  any  more  hanging 
about.
Then  Elendil  the  Tall 
and  his  mighty  sons,  Isildur  and  Anarion,  became  great  lords; 
and  the  North-realm  they  made  in  Arnor,  and  the  South- 
realm  in  Gondor  above  the  mouths  of  Anduin.
Do  not  lay  it  aside,  even  in  sleep,  unless  fortune 
brings  you  where  you  are  safe  for  a  while;  and  that  will  seldom 
chance  while  your  quest  lasts.’ 

When  they  had  eaten,  the  Company  got  ready  to  go  on.
But  then  he  turned  aside.
‘But  what  do  you 
guess  is  the  reason?’  he  asked.
‘What’s  more,’  he  said,  ‘there  seems  to  be  something  like  a 
footpath  winding  along  on  this  side  of  the  river.
He  was  smiling, 


MANY  MEETINGS 


291 


and  there  seemed  to  be  little  wrong  with  him.
‘He’s  a 
good  friend  to  all  the  Brandybucks.
But  it  is  said  that  no  foot  of  man 
or  beast  has  ever  been  set  upon  Tol  Brandir.
But  without  any  light  they  would  soon  have  come  to 
grief.
And  so  their  debate  ended.
‘That  is 
a  song,’  he  said,  ‘in  the  mode  that  is  called  ann-thennath 
among  the  Elves,  but  is  hard  to  render  in  our  Common 
Speech,  and  this  is  but  a  rough  echo  of  it.
For  of  Beren 
and  Luthien  was  born  Dior  Thingol’s  heir;  and  of  him  Elwing 
the  White  whom  Earendil  wedded,  he  that  sailed  his  ship  out 
of  the  mists  of  the  world  into  the  seas  of  heaven  with  the 
Silmaril  upon  his  brow.
Frodo  had  chosen 
it,  because  it  stood  in  an  out-of-the-way  corner  of  the 
country,  and  there  were  no  other  dwellings  close  by.
Or  until  it  is  found  in  your 
despite,  and  the  Ruler  has  time  to  turn  to  lighter  matters:  to 
devise,  say,  a  fitting  reward  for  the  hindrance  and  insolence 
of  Gandalf  the  Grey.” 

‘  “That  may  not  prove  to  be  one  of  the  lighter  matters,” 
said  I.
Valour  needs  first 
strength,  and  then  a  weapon.
Where  now  she  wanders  none  can  tell, 

In  sunlight  or  in  shade; 

For  lost  of  yore  was  Nimrodel 
And  in  the  mountains  strayed.
‘ Daro!’  it  said  in  commanding  tone,  and  Legolas  dropped 
back  to  earth  in  surprise  and  fear.
I  have  known  about 
the  existence  of  the  Ring  for  years  -  before  Bilbo  went  away, 
in  fact;  but  since  he  obviously  regarded  it  as  secret,  I  kept  the 
knowledge  in  my  head,  until  we  formed  our  conspiracy.
Hurrying  up  they  saw  below  them  a  deep  and  narrow  chan¬ 
nel.
‘Y ou  know  not  what  you  say.
Gandalf’s  eyes 
remained  bent  on  the  hobbit.
Watch  out  tonight!
But  Tom  now  seemed  wide 
awake  and  plied  them  with  questions.
All  the  one  hundred  and  forty-four  guests  expected  a  pleas¬ 
ant  feast;  though  they  rather  dreaded  the  after-dinner  speech 
of  their  host  (an  inevitable  item) .
There  are  five  behind  us,  and  when  they 
find  your  trail  upon  the  Road  they  will  ride  after  us  like  the 
wind.
Each  member  of  the  Company  was  busy  with  his  own 
thoughts.
When  he  had  overcome  Sancho  and  pushed  him  out, 
Frodo  collapsed  on  a  chair  in  the  hall.
Bilbo  huddled  in  a  cloak  stood  silent  on  the  door¬ 
step  beside  Frodo.
I 
love  him  more  than  ever.
There  was  a  blinding  flash 
of  light,  and  the  guests  all  blinked.
Strider  now  turned  their  course  again  north¬ 
eastwards,  and  on  the  sixth  day  they  reached  the  top  of  a 
long  slow-climbing  slope,  and  saw  far  ahead  a  huddle  of 
wooded  hills.
268 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


When  they  came  to  the  corner  they  looked  round  and  saw 
that  the  path  ran  on  over  a  level  strip  under  the  face  of  a  low 
cliff  overhung  with  trees.
Now  I  see  your  mind.
But 
now  his  thoughts  had  been  carried  away  from  the  dark  Mines, 
to  Rivendell,  to  Bilbo,  and  to  Bag  End  in  the  days  while  Bilbo 
was  still  there.
As  they  listened,  they  began  to  understand  the  lives  of  the 
Forest,  apart  from  themselves,  indeed  to  feel  themselves  as 
the  strangers  where  all  other  things  were  at  home.
As  soon  as  his  back  was  turned,  a 
dark  figure  climbed  quickly  in  over  the  gate  and  melted  into 
the  shadows  of  the  village  street.
I  name  you  Elf-friend; 
and  may  the  stars  shine  upon  the  end  of  your  road!
It  may  be  that  this  War  of  the  Ring  will  be  their 
last  adventure.’ 

‘Do  you  really  mean  that  Strider  is  one  of  the  people  of 
the  old  Kings?’  said  Frodo  in  wonder.
There  was  another  hiss  and  a  splash,  and  the  dark 
log-shape  shot  away  downstream  into  the  night.
‘I  do  not  know,’  he  said.
‘Say  no  more!
Too  simple  for  a  learned  lore-master  in  these  suspicious  days.
‘  “So  you  have  come,  Gandalf,”  he  said  to  me  gravely;  but 
in  his  eyes  there  seemed  to  be  a  white  light,  as  if  a  cold 
laughter  was  in  his  heart.
And  what  do  you  want  with 
me?
yes,’  said  Elrond.
‘Then  your  right  name  is 
Baggins?’ 

‘It  is,’  said  Frodo,  ‘and  you  had  better  give  me  that  letter 
at  once,  and  explain  why  you  never  sent  it.
They  had  hardly  laid  themselves 
on  the  deep  beds  and  drawn  the  light  covers  over  them  before 
they  were  asleep.
But  this  would  mean 
exile,  a  flight  from  danger  into  danger,  drawing  it  after  me.
‘The  strength  of 
the  Elves  to  resist  him  was  greater  long  ago;  and  not  all 
Men  were  estranged  from  them.
Sam  and  Strider  went  forward,  but 
they  found  no  sign  of  any  travellers  or  riders.
It  vanished, 
and  Frodo  sighed  and  prepared  to  draw  away.
Now  at  this  last  we  must  take  a  hard  road, 
a  road  unforeseen.
‘Yes  we  shall!’  cried  Pippin.
The  letters  are  Elvish,  of  an 
ancient  mode,  but  the  language  is  that  of  Mordor,  which  I 
will  not  utter  here.
There  Smeagol  got  out  and 
went  nosing  about  the  banks  but  Deagol  sat  in  the  boat  and 
fished.
But  that  is  not  for  them  to  decide.
The  fireworks  were  by  Gandalf:  they  were  not  only  brought 
by  him,  but  designed  and  made  by  him;  and  the  special 
effects,  set  pieces,  and  flights  of  rockets  were  let  off  by 
him.
A  shadow  came  out  of  dark  places  far  away,  and  the 
bones  were  stirred  in  the  mounds.
‘Miserable  trickster!’  he  shouted.
A  bump  o’  the  boot  on  the  seat,  Tom  thought, 

Would  be  the  way  to  larn  him.
‘If  you  wish  only  to  destroy 
the  Ring,’  he  said,  ‘then  there  is  little  use  in  war  and  weapons; 
and  the  Men  of  Minas  Tirith  cannot  help.
Mist  and  twilight,  cloud  and  shade, 

Away  shall  fade!
As  the  evening  drew  on,  Frodo  woke  up  again,  and  he 
found  that  he  no  longer  felt  in  need  of  rest  or  sleep,  but  had 
a  mind  for  food  and  drink,  and  probably  for  singing  and 
story-telling  afterwards.
He  looked  first  for  his  friends.
FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


275 


and  he  felt  that  a  shadow  was  coming  between  him  and  the 
faces  of  his  friends.
Only  a  little  higher,  if  I  remember  rightly, 
this  path  leaves  the  cliff  and  runs  into  a  wide  shallow  trough 
at  the  bottom  of  a  long  hard  slope.
But  I  wanted  rest  and  sleep,  Bilbo,  Frodo  answered  with  an 
effort,  when  he  felt  himself  shaken,  and  he  came  back  pain¬ 
fully  to  wakefulness.
Their 
great  trunks  ran  like  pillars  down  each  side.
For  two 
more  nights  they  marched  on,  climbing  steadily  but  ever 
more  slowly  as  their  road  wound  up  into  the  hills,  and  the 
mountains  towered  up,  nearer  and  nearer.
More  deadly  to  him  was  the  name 
of  Elbereth.’ 

‘And  more  deadly  to  Frodo  was  this!’  He  stooped  again 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


259 


and  lifted  up  a  long  thin  knife.
‘This  pillar  marks  the  spot  where 
Durin  first  looked  in  the  Mirrormere,’  said  the  dwarf.
Baggins 
has  an  honest  reason  for  leaving  his  name  behind;  but  if  so, 
I  should  advise  him  and  his  friends  to  be  more  careful.’ 

‘I  don’t  see  what  interest  my  name  has  for  anyone  in  Bree,’ 
said  Frodo  angrily,  ‘and  I  have  still  to  learn  why  it  interests 
you.
Another  followed  him,  and 
then  another;  then  again  two  more.
Yet  it 
is  not  yours  to  give  me,  even  if  you  would;  and  only  through 
darkness  shall  I  come  to  it.’ 

‘Yet  maybe  this  will  lighten  your  heart,’  said  Galadriel;  ‘for 
it  was  left  in  my  care  to  be  given  to  you,  should  you  pass 
through  this  land.’  Then  she  lifted  from  her  lap  a  great  stone 
of  a  clear  green,  set  in  a  silver  brooch  that  was  wrought  in 
the  likeness  of  an  eagle  with  outspread  wings;  and  as  she  held 
it  up  the  gem  flashed  like  the  sun  shining  through  the  leaves 
of  spring.
‘But 
perhaps  it  would  only  have  made  matters  worse.’ 

‘Then  you  know  or  guess  something  about  this  rider?’  said 
Pippin,  who  had  caught  the  muttered  words.
Their  dark  withered  plumes  bent  and  tossed  in  the  light  cold 
airs,  hissing  softly  and  sadly.
You’d  put  things 
to  rights.
There  were  many  of  these.
Give  it  to  Frodo, 
and  I  will  look  after  him.’ 

Bilbo  stood  for  a  moment  tense  and  undecided.
‘Yrch!’  said  the  Elf  in  a  hissing  whisper,  and  cast  on  to  the 
flet  the  rope-ladder  rolled  up.
Nothing  more  did  I  ever  get  from  his  mouth  than 
the  marks  of  his  teeth.
He  deserves  death.’ 

‘Deserves  it!
The  Enemy  has  set  traps  for  me  before  now.
The  night  was  clear,  cool,  and  starry,  but  smoke-like  wisps 
of  mist  were  creeping  up  the  hill-sides  from  the  streams  and 
deep  meadows.
‘Leaving  the  letter  aside,  I  promised  Gandalf  no  less.
Remember  that  the  Mirror  shows 
many  things,  and  not  all  have  yet  come  to  pass.
‘This  is  the  lawn 
of  Parth  Galen:  a  fair  place  in  the  summer  days  of  old.
From  the  inside  you  may  thrust  them  open  with 
your  hands.
Old  Tom  Bombadil’s  not  as  blind  as 
that  yet.
There  is  I  cannot  read  what.
“Have  you 
seen  Baggins ?”  he  asked  in  a  queer  voice,  and  bent  down 
towards  me.
‘It  is  enough  for  me  to  have 
seen  the  Lady  of  the  Galadhrim,  and  to  have  heard  her  gentle 
words.’ 

‘Hear  all  ye  Elves!’  she  cried  to  those  about  her.
Away  in  the  distance  eastward  they  could  now  see  a  line  of 
hills.
There¬ 
fore  my  brother,  seeing  how  desperate  was  our  need,  was 
eager  to  heed  the  dream  and  seek  for  Imladris;  but  since  the 
way  was  full  of  doubt  and  danger,  I  took  the  journey  upon 
myself.
They  passed  through  the  lane;  but 
hardly  had  Frodo  touched  the  ground  when  with  a  deep 
rumble  there  rolled  down  a  fall  of  stones  and  slithering  snow.
Follow  me!’  He  made  his  end  of  the  rope  fast  about 
another  tree,  and  then  ran  lightly  along  it,  over  the  river  and 
back  again,  as  if  he  were  on  a  road.
It  was  bewildering 
beyond  hope  of  remembering.
I  shan’t  want  it  again, 
I  expect.’ 

Frodo  accepted  it  gratefully.
Far  away 
in  the  tumble  of  country  that  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain 
was  the  dell  from  which  they  had  started  to  climb  the  pass.
Less 
welcome  did  the  Lord  Denethor  show  me  then  than  of  old, 
and  grudgingly  he  permitted  me  to  search  among  his  hoarded 
scrolls  and  books.
He  had  passed 
between  them  almost  before  he  was  aware:  and  even  as  he 
did  so  darkness  seemed  to  fall  round  him.
There  was 
a  fire  in  the  wide  hearth  before  them,  and  it  was  burning 
with  a  sweet  smell,  as  if  it  were  built  of  apple-wood.
After 
a  brief  halt  and  a  hasty  meal  they  went  on  again.
Of  course  not!
The  rest  must  be  more 
brief.
It  broke  the 
rules.
Before  long  the 
Elves  came  down  the  lane  towards  the  valley.
And  I  know  where 
he’s  going  to.’ 

‘What  do  you  mean?’  said  Frodo  sharply,  looking  at  him 
in  astonishment.
‘“Gandalf!”  he  cried.
Flocks  of  birds,  flying  at  great  speed, 
were  wheeling  and  circling,  and  traversing  all  the  land  as  if 
they  were  searching  for  something;  and  they  were  steadily 
drawing  nearer.
When  I  looked  again,  it 
wasn’t  there.
‘Almost  exactly  what  I  felt 
myself;  only,  only  well,  I  don’t  think  I’ll  say  any  more,’  he 
ended  lamely.
Slender  they  looked,  but  strong, 
silken  to  the  touch,  grey  of  hue  like  the  elven-cloaks.
He 
gripped  tighter  on  the  hilt  of  his  sword  and  went  on  doggedly.
These  four 
now  suddenly  remembered  what  the  joy  of  this  house  had 
driven  from  their  minds:  the  house  of  Tom  Bombadil  nestled 
under  the  very  shoulder  of  those  dreaded  hills.
For  I  know  what  I  should  do,  but  I 
am  afraid  of  doing  it,  Boromir:  afraid.’ 

Boromir  stood  silent.
But 
if  you  desire  clearer  counsel,  you  should  ask  Gandalf.
This  is  Nenya,  the  Ring  of 
Adamant,  and  I  am  its  keeper.
You  are  looking  now  south-west 
across  the  north  plains  of  the  Riddermark,  Rohan  the  land  of 
the  Horse-lords.
Frodo  dozed,  though  the  pain  of  his  wound  was  slowly 
growing,  and  a  deadly  chill  was  spreading  from  his  shoulder 
to  his  arm  and  side.
Ring  the  bell,  if  you  lack 
anything!’ 

So  refreshed  and  encouraged  did  they  feel  at  the  end  of 
their  supper  (about  three  quarters  of  an  hour’s  steady  going, 
not  hindered  by  unnecessary  talk)  that  Frodo,  Pippin,  and 
Sam  decided  to  join  the  company.
If  we  go  back  now, 
then  the  Ring  must  remain  there:  we  shall  not  be  able  to  set 
out  again.
They  spoke  of  many  things,  old  and  new,  and  Frodo  ques¬ 
tioned  Gildor  much  about  happenings  in  the  wide  world 
outside  the  Shire.
Suddenly  into  view  below  came 
a  white  horse,  gleaming  in  the  shadows,  running  swiftly.
You,  Legolas,  must 
answer  to  us  for  them.
Pippin?’  said  Sam,  sheathing  his 
sword.
’  she  said,  taking  Frodo  by  the  hand .
The  rumours  that  you  have  heard  are  true:  he  has 
indeed  arisen  again  and  left  his  hold  in  Mirkwood  and 
returned  to  his  ancient  fastness  in  the  Dark  Tower  of  Mordor.
What  are  all  these  queer 
goings  on?
For  I  shall  take  you  by  the 
road  that  Gandalf  chose,  and  first  I  hope  to  come  to  the 
woods  where  the  Silverlode  flows  into  the  Great  River  -  out 
yonder.’  They  looked  as  he  pointed,  and  before  them  they 
could  see  the  stream  leaping  down  to  the  trough  of  the  valley, 
and  then  running  on  and  away  into  the  lower  lands,  until  it 
was  lost  in  a  golden  haze.
‘It  is  some  time  since  I  last 
heard  the  sound  of  your  shears.
I  urged  him  to  come  to  Minas  Tirith  and  not  to  go 
east.
He  could  hear  many  different  notes 
in  the  rustle  of  the  leaves  overhead,  the  river  murmuring 
away  on  his  right,  and  the  thin  clear  voices  of  birds  high  in 
the  sky.
Take  the  water  to  the  rooms!’ 
He  came  in  and  shut  the  door.
Snow  was  thick  on  his  hood  and  shoulders; 
it  was  already  ankle-deep  about  his  boots.
He  screwed  himself  up  to  the 
point,  sudden.
A  star  was  bound  upon  her  brows, 

A  light  was  on  her  hair 

As  sun  upon  the  golden  boughs 
In  Lorien  the  fair.
The  southern  travellers  had  lost  several  horses  and 
blamed  the  innkeeper  loudly,  until  it  became  known  that  one 
of  their  own  number  had  also  disappeared  in  the  night,  none 
other  than  Bill  Ferny’s  squint-eyed  companion.
Yes,  without  even  his  Sam.
‘Now  come!’  said  Gandalf.
Already  half 
their  weariness  and  all  their  fears  had  fallen  from  them.
‘You’re  right,  master,’ 
he  said,  ‘and  I  beg  your  pardon.
But  I  can  hear  fireside- 
tales  and  children’s  stories  at  home,  if  I  want  to.’ 

‘No  doubt  you  can,’  retorted  Sam,  ‘and  I  daresay  there’s 
more  truth  in  some  of  them  than  you  reckon.
I  wish  we  were  all  back 
at  Crickhollow!’  He  kicked  the  tree  with  all  his  strength,  heed¬ 
less  of  his  own  feet.
‘I  shall  take  more 
care  of  the  secret  than  you  do.
But  how  did  you  know 
that  they  were  in  Gandalf ’s  letter,  if  you  have  never  seen  it?’ 

‘I  did  not  know,’  he  answered.
But  Frodo  felt  the  chill  lessen  in  his  side  and 
arm;  a  little  warmth  crept  down  from  his  shoulder  to  his 
hand,  and  the  pain  grew  easier.
But  nobody  will  read  the 
book,  however  it  ends.’ 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


43 


‘Oh,  they  may,  in  years  to  come.
Frodo,  he  knows  he’s  got  to  find  the 
Cracks  of  Doom,  if  he  can.
Time  wore  on,  but  it 
seemed  to  have  little  effect  on  Mr.
You  would  have  become  a  wraith  under  the  dominion 
of  the  Dark  Lord;  and  he  would  have  tormented  you  for 
trying  to  keep  his  Ring,  if  any  greater  torment  were  possible 
than  being  robbed  of  it  and  seeing  it  on  his  hand.’ 

‘Thank  goodness  I  did  not  realize  the  horrible  danger!’  said 
Frodo  faintly.
The  world  was  young,  the  mountains  green, 

No  stain  yet  on  the  Moon  was  seen, 

No  words  were  laid  on  stream  or  stone 
When  Durin  woke  and  walked  alone.
Gandalf 
will  make  for  that  point,  if  he  follows  us.
It  was  difficult  to 
learn  anything  from  him  for  certain,  for  his  talk  was  con¬ 
stantly  interrupted  by  curses  and  threats.
I  hope  you  enjoyed 
yourself?’ 

‘Why  weren’t  you  there?’  cried  Frodo.
‘The  road  under  the  mountains  is  a 
dark  road,  and  there  are  places  narrow  and  steep  which  he 
cannot  tread,  even  if  we  can.’ 

‘Poor  old  Bill!’  said  Frodo.
‘What  he  had  been  doing  he  would  not  say.
But  Boromir  and  Aragorn  doubtless  do  not  need  this 
warning.’ 

‘Indeed  we  have  heard  of  Fangorn  in  Minas  Tirith,’  said 
Boromir.
At  the  brink  Gandalf  halted  and  the  others  came 
up  in  a  pack  behind.
And  the  halls  and  cavernous 
streets  under  the  earth  with  arches  carved  like  trees;  and  the 
terraces  and  towers  upon  the  Mountain’s  sides!
If  Gandalf  ever  came  here,  then  he 
must  have  been  forced  to  ride  away,  and  he  will  not  return.
And 
hobbits  as  miserable  slaves  would  please  him  far  more  than 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST  65 

hobbits  happy  and  free.
Their  hearts  sank.
But  eddying  blasts  swirled  round  them  from  every 
side,  and  the  snow  flowed  down  in  ever  denser  clouds.
So 
I  set  a  watch  for  him,  guessing  that  he  would  ere  long  come 
forth  from  his  darkness  to  seek  for  his  treasure.
The  air  was  warm.
‘Where’s  the  water?’ 

‘I  don’t  keep  water  in  my  pockets,’  said  Frodo.
But  be  that  as  it  may,  Mr.
Their  hearts 
were  encouraged,  but  they  longed  for  the  sun  to  warm  their 
cold  stiff  limbs.
Baggins  is  it?
Yes,  it  must  be  yestre 
followed  by  day  being  the  tenth  ofnovembre  Balin  lord  ofMoria 


420  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

fell  in  Dimrill  Dale.
A  feeling  of  fear  had 
been  growing  on  him  all  day,  and  he  was  unable  to  rest  or  go 
to  bed:  there  was  a  brooding  threat  in  the  breathless  night-air.
Then  he  actually  rose  from  his  seat  and  bowed.
The  Ring  will  not  be  able  to  stay  hidden  in  the 
Shire  much  longer;  and  for  your  own  sake,  as  well  as  for 
others,  you  will  have  to  go,  and  leave  the  name  of  Baggins 
behind  you.
I  let  him  go;  for  I  had 
much  else  to  think  of  at  that  time,  and  I  still  trusted  the  lore 
of  Saruman.
‘You  ought  to  mop  all  that  up  before  you  get  anything 
to  eat,  Peregrin,’  he  said.
And  that  is  another 
reason  why  the  Ring  should  be  destroyed:  as  long  as  it  is  in 
the  world  it  will  be  a  danger  even  to  the  Wise.
‘By  Elbereth  and  Luthien  the  Fair,’  said  Frodo  with  a  last 
effort,  lifting  up  his  sword,  ‘you  shall  have  neither  the  Ring 
nor  me!’ 

Then  the  leader,  who  was  now  half  across  the  Ford,  stood 
up  menacing  in  his  stirrups,  and  raised  up  his  hand.
At  least  he  must  get  up  and  see  us  off.’ 

Soon  after  six  o’clock  the  five  hobbits  were  ready  to  start.
The  roar  of  the  great  falls 
drew  nearer.
Are  you  Mr.
The  Lord  of  the  Ring  is  not 
Frodo,  but  the  master  of  the  Dark  Tower  of  Mordor,  whose 
power  is  again  stretching  out  over  the  world.
I  can  put  it  no  plainer  than  by 
saying  that  Bilbo  was  meant  to  find  the  Ring,  and  not  by  its 
maker.
It  was  now  nearly  three  hours  after  noon,  and  they  had  come 
only  a  few  miles  from  the  Gates.
He  fell  silent  again;  but  Frodo  could  not  help  asking  one 
more  question:  the  one  he  most  desired  to  have  answered.
‘Then  I’ll  tell  you  what  to  think,’  said  Maggot.
The  blow  caught  him  on  the  right  side,  and  Frodo 
was  hurled  against  the  wall  and  pinned.
Then  he  tried  other  spells,  one  after  another, 
speaking  now  faster  and  louder,  now  soft  and  slow.
It  raised  the  whip,  and  the 
thongs  whined  and  cracked.
‘Your  legs  are  too 
short,  so  use  your  head!
It  sloped  up  away  from  the  River,  a  tumbled  waste  of 
grey  limestone-boulders,  with  many  hidden  holes  shrouded 
with  weeds  and  bushes;  there  were  thickets  of  brambles,  and 
sheer  dells;  and  here  and  there  boggy  pools  fed  by  waters 
trickling  from  the  terraces  further  inland.
‘They 
will  return.
A  gleam  of  firelight  came  from 
the  open  doors,  and  soft  lights  were  glowing  in  many 
windows.
Their  camping-place  was  damp,  cold,  and  uncom¬ 
fortable;  and  the  biting  insects  would  not  let  them  sleep.
They  did  not  dare  to  move.
The  swift-flowing  clouds  lifted  and  melted  away, 
and  the  sun  came  out,  pale  and  bright.
They  would  help  him.
‘In  that  dream  I  thought  the  eastern  sky  grew  dark  and 
there  was  a  growing  thunder,  but  in  the  West  a  pale  light 
lingered,  and  out  of  it  I  heard  a  voice,  remote  but  clear, 
crying: 


Seek  for  the  Sword  that  was  broken: 

In  Imladris  it  dwells; 

There  shall  be  counsels  taken 
Stronger  than  Morgul-spells.
The  last  slope  had  been  steep  and  rocky.
They  cannot  stay  in  The  Pony  for 
ever,  and  they  cannot  go  home.
But  keep  it  secret,  and  keep  it  safe!
There  were  also  many  families  of  hobbits  in  the  Bree-land; 
and  they  claimed  to  be  the  oldest  settlement  of  Hobbits  in  the 
world,  one  that  was  founded  long  before  even  the  Brandy¬ 
wine  was  crossed  and  the  Shire  colonized.
‘A  fat 
innkeeper  who  only  remembers  his  own  name  because  people 
shout  it  at  him  all  day?
I 
think  it  was - ’  Then  he  paused  and  fell  silent.
‘So  you  have  got  here  at 
last.
Too  much  it  reminded  me  of 
the  shadow  in  Moria  -  the  shadow  of  the  Balrog,’  he  ended 
in  a  whisper.
‘I  must  go  now  or  I  shall  never  go.
I  brought  him  there  at  last  and  gave  him 
to  the  Elves,  for  we  had  agreed  that  this  should  be  done;  and 
I  was  glad  to  be  rid  of  his  company,  for  he  stank.
He  knows  that  it  is  the  One.
Nor  shall  I  be  passing 
Old  Man  Willow’s  house  this  side  of  spring-time, 
not  till  the  merry  spring,  when  the  River-daughter 
dances  down  the  withy-path  to  bathe  in  the  water.
These  they  heaped  against  the  trunk  on  the  far  side  of  the 
tree  from  the  prisoners.
But  the  marks  might  mean  something 
quite  different,  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  us.
I  beheld  the  last  combat  on  the  slopes  of  Orodruin, 
where  Gil-galad  died,  and  Elendil  fell,  and  Narsil  broke 
beneath  him;  but  Sauron  himself  was  overthrown,  and  Isildur 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND  317 

cut  the  Ring  from  his  hand  with  the  hilt-shard  of  his  father’s 
sword,  and  took  it  for  his  own.’ 

At  this  the  stranger,  Boromir,  broke  in.
No  sound  of 
Sam’s  shears  could  now  be  heard.
‘Why  not?’  he  cried.
There  is  still  hope  for  it.
The  story  ended.
And  I  saw  a  strange 
creature  with  eyes  climbing  to  the  flet  that  night.
Merry  and  Pippin  suspected  that  he  visited  the  Elves  at  times, 
as  Bilbo  had  done.
This  would  mean 
crossing  the  Road,  but  it  was  the  quickest  way  to  more 
wooded  country.
If  you  weren’t  hobbits,  I 
doubt  if  we  could  house  you.
‘Or  maybe  it  wasn’t  a  dream.
It 
was  very  dark.
Never  did 
I  make  a  greater  mistake!
It  was  the  cold  chill  hour  before  the  first  stir  of  dawn,  and 
the  moon  was  low.
I  was  far  from  Isengard, 
ere  the  wolves  and  ores  issued  from  the  gate  to  pursue  me.
The  Gaffer  is  getting 
old,  and  more  than  a  bit  blind,  and  it  must  have  been  near 
dark  when  this  fellow  come  up  the  Hill  and  found  him  taking 
the  air  at  the  end  of  our  Row.
‘Good!’  said  Gandalf.
The  enemy  is  on  the  eastern  shore,  we  know;  but  I  fear 
that  the  Ores  may  already  be  on  this  side  of  the  water.’ 

There  was  a  long  silence  in  which  no  one  spoke  or  moved.
I  wonder  what  he  will  say?’ 

‘I  am  sorry,’  said  Gandalf.
Butterbur  knew  his 
money  was  gone  for  good,  or  for  bad.
But  why,  if  it  were  with  us?’ 

‘Were  you  not  at  the  Council?’  answered  Frodo.
Not  far  from  this  tunnel  there  is,  or  was  for  a  long 
time,  the  beginning  of  quite  a  broad  path  leading  to  the 
Bonfire  Glade,  and  then  on  more  or  less  in  our  direction,  east 
and  a  little  north.
I  at  least  have 
a  mind  to  stand  in  that  high  place  again,  before  I  decide  my 
further  course.
Here  is  the  last  page  of 
all.’  He  paused  and  sighed.
They  went  along  many  paths  and  climbed  many  stairs, 
until  they  came  to  the  high  places  and  saw  before  them  amid 
a  wide  lawn  a  fountain  shimmering.
And  also,  I  fancy,  you’ll  find  a  golden  ring.’ 

‘The  ring!’  exclaimed  Frodo.
I  have  seen  three  ages  in  the  West  of  the  world,  and 
many  defeats,  and  many  fruitless  victories.
The  future,  good  or  ill, 
was  not  forgotten,  but  ceased  to  have  any  power  over  the 
present.
Why  should  Mr.
But  this,  if  you  will,  is  the 
magic  of  Galadriel.
Then  a  white  fortress  with  seven 
towers.
‘Keep  to  the  green  grass.
Fiddlesticks!’  He  snapped  his  fingers  under 
Frodo’s  nose  and  stumped  off.
Soon  they 
were  passing  through  a  hilly  rocky  land,  and  on  both  shores 
there  were  steep  slopes  buried  in  deep  brakes  of  thorn  and 
sloe,  tangled  with  brambles  and  creepers.
Pippin,  Merry,  and  Sam  were  by  that  time  nearly 
asleep  on  their  stumbling  legs;  and  even  Strider  seemed  by 
the  sag  of  his  shoulders  to  be  weary.
Under  the  boughs  of  Mirkwood 
there  was  deadly  strife  of  Elves  and  Men  and  fell  beasts.
After  they  had 
eaten,  Gandalf  gave  them  each  a  third  sip  of  the  miruvor  of 
Rivendell.
The  howling  of  the  wolves  was  now  all  round 
them,  sometimes  nearer  and  sometimes  further  off.
He  looked  up  and  saw  with  surprise 
that  faint  stars  were  appearing  overhead  amid  the  strands  of 
hurrying  cloud  and  fog.
As  if  through  a  gate 
they  saw  the  sunlight  before  them.
‘You  seem  to  be  coming  to  your  senses 
again,  and  that  is  all  to  the  good.
Let  us  think  of  what  we  are  to  do  now!
‘Well!’  said  Frodo  at  last,  sitting  up  and  straightening  his 
back,  as  if  he  had  made  a  decision.
I’ll  try  my  teeth  on  thee  now.
But  either  Gandalf  was  astray,  or  else  the  land 
had  changed  in  recent  years;  for  he  did  not  strike  the  stream 
where  he  looked  to  find  it,  only  a  few  miles  southwards  from 
their  start.
The 
Ringwraiths  are  deadly  enemies,  but  they  are  only  shadows 
yet  of  the  power  and  terror  they  would  possess  if  the  Ruling 
Ring  was  on  their  master’s  hand  again.’ 

‘Then  we  must  go  on,  if  there  is  a  way,’  said  Frodo  with  a 
sigh.
‘Here  you  will  hear  many  songs 
and  tales  -  if  you  can  keep  awake.
Come  now!
The  local  hobbits  stared  in  amazement,  and  then  sprang 
to  their  feet  and  shouted  for  Barliman.
Her  face  looked  as  if  she 
was  in  the  throes  of  thinking  out  a  really  crushing  parting 
remark;  but  all  she  found  to  say,  turning  round  on  the  step, 
was: 

‘You’ll  five  to  regret  it,  young  fellow!
You  should  see  the  waterways  of  Dale,  Frodo, 
and  the  fountains,  and  the  pools!
They  drew  away  from  me,  for  they  felt  the  coming 
of  my  anger  and  they  dared  not  face  it  while  the  Sun  was  in 
the  sky.
But  I  will  do  what 
I  can.’ 

He  sat  down  on  the  ground,  and  taking  the  dagger-hilt  laid 
it  on  his  knees,  and  he  sang  over  it  a  slow  song  in  a  strange 
tongue.
Then  the  watch  upon  the  walls  of  Mordor 
slept,  and  dark  things  crept  back  to  Gorgoroth.
Glorfindel  still  urged  them  on,  and  only 
allowed  two  brief  halts  during  the  day’s  march.
When  you  go,  go  as  Mr.
Some  people  are  actu¬ 
ally  accusing  me  of  spiriting  Bilbo  away,  or  worse.
Fear  neither  root  nor  bough!
He  was  fully  awake  now,  and  the 
memory  of  his  journey  was  returning:  the  disastrous  ‘short 
cut’  through  the  Old  Forest;  the  ‘accident’  at  The  Prancing 
Pony.
If  I  take  your  advice 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


III 


I  may  not  see  Gandalf  for  a  long  while,  and  I  ought  to  know 
what  is  the  danger  that  pursues  me.’ 

‘Is  it  not  enough  to  know  that  they  are  servants  of  the 
Enemy?’  answered  Gildor.
‘Why  did  I  delay?
Sam  plainly  was  beginning  to  have  doubts  again  about 
Strider;  but  while  they  were  talking  he  returned,  appearing 
suddenly  out  of  the  shadows.
Hail,  Elf-friend!’  he  said,  bowing  to  Frodo.
you  know  best,’  said  the  landlord,  knowingly.
A  light  was  upon  it  for  which  his  language 
had  no  name.
The  air  grew 
warmer  between  the  green  walls  of  hillside  and  hillside,  and 
the  scent  of  turf  rose  strong  and  sweet  as  they  breathed.
Bilbo’s  tales.
I  might  find  somewhere  where  I  can  finish  my 
book.
Rory  quite  forgave  Bilbo,  and  voted  him  a 
capital  fellow  after  the  first  bottle.
It  is  for  you  that  I  feel  responsible.
‘No,  sir,  I  haven’t, 
sir!’  he  said.
‘I  learned  it 
from  Mr.
The  Sackville-Bagginses  won’t  never  see 
the  inside  of  Bag  End  now,  or  it  is  to  be  hoped  not.’ 

‘There’s  a  tidy  bit  of  money  tucked  away  up  there,  I  hear 
tell,’  said  a  stranger,  a  visitor  on  business  from  Michel 
Delving  in  the  Westfarthing.
But 
Gandalf  stood  firm.
The  ranks  of  the  ores  had  opened,  and  they  crowded  away, 
as  if  they  themselves  were  afraid.
But  I  understand  that  Gandalf  chose 
me  a  good  companion.
And  who  may 
you  be,  and  what  may  you  be  wanting?’  he  asked.
Only  on  the  Road  would  travellers 
be  found,  most  often  dwarves,  hurrying  along  on  business  of 
their  own,  and  with  no  help  and  few  words  to  spare  for 
strangers.
Merry  took  charge  of  this, 
and  drove  off  with  Fatty  (that  is  Fredegar  Bolger).
Also  northward,  and  to  the  left  of  the  path,  the  land 
seemed  to  be  drier  and  more  open,  climbing  up  to  slopes 
where  the  trees  were  thinner,  and  pines  and  firs  replaced  the 
oaks  and  ashes  and  other  strange  and  nameless  trees  of  the 
denser  wood.
For 
myself  I  should  like  a  pipe  to  smoke  in  comfort,  and  warmer 
feet.
‘But  at  the  western  edge  of  Mirkwood  the  trail  turned 
away.
There  it  casts  its  arms  about  the 
steep  shores  of  the  isle,  and  falls  then  with  a  great  noise  and 
smoke  over  the  cataracts  of  Rauros  down  into  the  Nindalf, 
the  Wetwang  as  it  is  called  in  your  tongue.
Let’s  get  out 
of  sight!’ 

The  other  two  ran  quickly  to  the  left  and  down  into  a  little 


98 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


hollow  not  far  from  the  road.
Frodo!’  gasped  Sam.
‘Here  is  written  in  the  tongues  of  Men 
and  Dwarves: 


BALIN  SON  OF  FUNDIN 
LORD  OF  MORIA.’ 

‘He  is  dead  then,’  said  Frodo.
‘Ah!’  said  Sam.
These  elves 
and  half-elves  and  wizards,  they  would  come  to  grief  perhaps.
But  there  is  no  smith’s  forge  in  this  Shire  that 
could  change  it  at  all.
‘Neither  does  Frodo,’  said  Gandalf,  unexpectedly  support¬ 
ing  Pippin.
How  it  had  happened  I  could  not  then  guess, 
but  I  learned  that  you  had  been  in  Bree  the  night  before,  and 
had  gone  off  that  morning  with  Strider.
‘Eight  out  of  the  Nine  are  accounted  for  at  least,’  said 
Gandalf.
Beyond  it  a  rutted  lane  ran  between  low 
well-laid  hedges  towards  a  distant  clump  of  trees.
‘Mind  yourself!
‘Well,’  said  Strider,  ‘with  Sam’s  permission  we  will  call  that 
settled.
The  noise  of  bub¬ 
bling  waters  came  up  from  the  foaming  river-bed.
But  have  they  the 
strength,  have  we  here  the  strength  to  withstand  the  Enemy, 
the  coming  of  Sauron  at  the  last,  when  all  else  is  overthrown?’ 

‘I  have  not  the  strength,’  said  Elrond;  ‘neither  have  they.’ 

‘Then  if  the  Ring  cannot  be  kept  from  him  for  ever  by 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND  347 

strength,’  said  Glorfindel,  ‘two  things  only  remain  for  us  to 
attempt:  to  send  it  over  the  Sea,  or  to  destroy  it.’ 

‘But  Gandalf  has  revealed  to  us  that  we  cannot  destroy  it 
by  any  craft  that  we  here  possess,’  said  Elrond.
For 
some  while  he  climbed,  not  caring  which  way  he  went,  until 
he  came  to  a  grassy  place.
‘But  what  about  the  Black  Riders?
We  cannot  get  out.
Frodo  is  going  away?’ 

‘I  did,  sir.
The  farmer  sat  in  the  driving-seat,  and 
whipped  up  his  two  stout  ponies.
The  houses 
looked  large  and  strange  to  them.
Then  another  clear  voice,  as  young  and  as  ancient  as 
Spring,  like  the  song  of  a  glad  water  flowing  down  into  the 
night  from  a  bright  morning  in  the  hills,  came  falling  like 
silver  to  meet  them: 

Now  let  the  song  begin!
There  is  nothing  more.’ 
Gandalf  paused  and  stood  in  silent  thought.
It  grew  slowly  dark  indoors.
I  now  know  where  we  are.
‘Farewell!’  he  said  to  Gandalf.
Ho!
Of  my  household  I  may  find  some  that  it 
seems  good  to  me  to  send.’ 

‘But  that  will  leave  no  place  for  us!’  cried  Pippin  in  dismay.
Let’s  have  it  then!’  said  Frodo,  unwisely  inter¬ 
rupting.
He  can  ride  very  swiftly  when  need  presses.’ 
Suddenly  he  stooped  and  looked  at  the  stone  on  the  top  of 
the  cairn;  it  was  flatter  than  the  others,  and  whiter,  as  if  it 
had  escaped  the  fire.
The  hobbits  were  glad  to  leave  the  cheerless  lands  and 
the  perilous  Road  behind  them;  but  this  new  country  seemed 
threatening  and  unfriendly.
He  gave  me  a  look  as  plain  as 
Mr.
But  today  we 
have  broken  our  long  law.
‘What 
can  I  do?’  he  muttered.
‘I  think — No,  I  will  not  say,’  answered  Frodo.
The  others  looked  dismayed;  only  Aragorn,  who  knew 
Gandalf  well,  remained  silent  and  unmoved.
Merry 
and  Pippin  began  a  song,  which  they  had  apparently  got 
ready  for  the  occasion.
As 
they  looked  she  gave  a  clear  call,  and  lifting  up  her  hand  she 
turned  and  vanished  behind  the  hill.
‘Yes,  sir.
‘Let  us  return!’  she  said.
Sam  looked  at  him  unhappily.
‘If  we  get  to  the  other 
side  of  this  hill,  we  shall  find  a  spot  that  is  sheltered  and  snug 
enough,  sir.
The  westward  road  seems  easiest.
‘Am  I  right  in  guessing  that  you  are  the  Gloin,  one  of  the 
twelve  companions  of  the  great  Thorin  Oakenshield?’ 

‘Quite  right,’  answered  the  dwarf,  gathering  up  the 
cushions  and  courteously  assisting  Frodo  back  into  his  seat.
But  Saruman  has  long  studied  the  arts  of  the 
Enemy  himself,  and  thus  we  have  often  been  able  to  forestall 
him.
When  the  day  came  the  mood  of  the  world  about  them  had 
become  soft  and  sad.
‘And  the  Gaffer 
said  he  was  a  black  chap.’ 

‘I  wish  I  had  waited  for  Gandalf,’  Frodo  muttered.
‘I  found  it  in  the  mud  in  the  middle  of  the  Bridge,’  he  said.
A  shaft 
is  mentioned.
‘Indeed,’  said  Gloin,  ‘if  it  were  not  for  the  Beornings,  the 
passage  from  Dale  to  Rivendell  would  long  ago  have  become 
impossible.
It  was  some  distance  from  the  Brandywine  to  Frodo’s  new 
house  at  Crickhollow.
And  some  that  die  deserve  life.
Folco  Boffin  and 
Fredegar  Bolger  were  two  of  these;  but  his  closest  friends 
were  Peregrin  Took  (usually  called  Pippin),  and  Merry 
Brandybuck  (his  real  name  was  Meriadoc,  but  that  was 
seldom  remembered).
The  others  fell  asleep.
We  will  leave  at 
once.
Merry’s  ponies  had  escaped  altogether,  and 
eventually  (having  a  good  deal  of  sense)  they  made  their  way 
to  the  Downs  in  search  of  Fatty  Lumpkin.
But  that  I  am  afraid  will  be  just  your  luck.’ 

‘I  am  afraid  it  will,’  said  Gandalf.
He  set  out  and  came  back  westward,  as  far  as  the 
Great  River.
Pippin  roused  a  good  deal  of  laughter  with  an  account 
of  the  collapse  of  the  roof  of  the  Town  Hole  in  Michel 
Delving:  Will  Whitfoot,  the  Mayor,  and  the  fattest  hobbit  in 
the  Westfarthing,  had  been  buried  in  chalk,  and  came  out 
like  a  floured  dumpling.
Frodo!
And  if  I’m  not  with  him,  he  may  be  in  trouble,  and  he 
may  need  help.
Since 
they  were  all  hobbits,  and  were  trying  to  be  silent,  they  made 
no  noise  that  even  hobbits  would  hear.
‘As  all  your  unpleasant  advice  has 
been  good,  I  wonder  if  this  advice  is  not  bad.
The  hobbits  lay  down  on  their  blankets  with  their  feet 
towards  the  hearth;  but  Strider  settled  himself  in  the  chair 
against  the  door.
You  may  escape  from  Bree,  and  be 
allowed  to  go  forward  while  the  Sun  is  up;  but  you  won’t  go 
far.
‘And  they 
who  dwell  beyond  the  Sea  would  not  receive  it:  for  good  or 
ill  it  belongs  to  Middle-earth;  it  is  for  us  who  still  dwell  here 
to  deal  with  it.’ 

‘Then,’  said  Glorfindel,  ‘let  us  cast  it  into  the  deeps,  and 
so  make  the  lies  of  Saruman  come  true.
‘We 
could  not  have  left  any  message  behind  for  Gandalf  other¬ 
wise.
‘Alas!
The  branches  of  the 
willow  began  to  sway  violently.
Frodo  himself,  after  the  first  shock,  found  that  being  his  own 
master  and  the  Mr.
I  fear  we  cannot  stay  here  longer,’  said  Aragorn.
Crying 
farewell,  the  Elves  of  Lorien  with  long  grey  poles  thrust  them 
out  into  the  flowing  stream,  and  the  rippling  waters  bore 
them  slowly  away.
There  was  a  swift  current  which  swung 
left,  towards  the  eastern  shore  where  the  channel  was  clear.
Everything  looked  fresh,  and  the  new  green  of 
spring  was  shimmering  in  the  fields  and  on  the  tips  of  the 
trees’  fingers.
‘These 
I  will  consider.
At  the  far  end  it  was  closed  by  a 
gate  of  thick-set  iron  bars.
‘Hurray!
I  know  the  tune  for  him.
You  must  help  me  bear  them.’ 

Together  they  carried  out  Merry,  Pippin,  and  Sam.
What  have  you  heard,  and  why  did  you 
listen?’  Gandalf ’s  eyes  flashed  and  his  brows  stuck  out  like 
bristles.
All  was  bleak  and  dry.
Time  was  when  a 
squirrel  could  go  from  tree  to  tree  from  what  is  now  the  Shire 
to  Dunland  west  of  Isengard.
Breakfast  at  six-thirty,  please.’ 

‘Right!
‘All  shall  be  prepared  for  you  and  await  you  at  the  haven 
before  noon  tomorrow,’  said  Celeborn.
The  clouds  lowered,  and  now  a  few  flakes  of 
snow  came  curling  down  again.
‘It  is  time  to  get  up.
Young  she  was  and  yet  not  so.
My  advice  is:  stay 
there!
That’s  the  only 
answer.
I  called  the 
dogs,  but  he  swung  off,  and  rode  through  the  gate  and  up 
the  lane  towards  the  causeway  like  a  bolt  of  thunder.
‘We  have  two  more  ropes.
‘However,  I  wrote  a  message  to  Frodo,  and  trusted  to  my 
friend  the  innkeeper  to  send  it  to  him.
‘For 
this  is  the  heart  of  the  ancient  realm  as  it  was  long  ago,  and 
here  is  the  mound  of  Amroth,  where  in  happier  days  his  high 
house  was  built.
WJnther  do  you  wander?
‘You  will  have  no  claim,’  said  Haldir.
Make  sure  that  it  is  the  real  Strider.
But  the  thing  was  eating  up  his  mind,  of 
course,  and  the  torment  had  become  almost  unbearable.
‘Do  not  touch  the  water!’  said  the  Lady  Galadriel  softly.
‘Hurry  up,  or  we  shan’t  wait  for  you.’ 

They  had  supper  in  the  kitchen  on  a  table  near  the  fire.
That’s  settled.
White  flames  seemed  to  Frodo  to 
flicker  on  their  crests,  and  he  half  fancied  that  he  saw  amid 
the  water  white  riders  upon  white  horses  with  frothing 
manes.
There  was  only  one  thing  he  could  do:  trembling  he  pulled 
out  the  Ring  upon  its  chain  and  quickly  slipped  it  on  his 
finger,  even  as  Boromir  sprang  at  him  again.
What  do 
you  want,  and  where  are  you  going?’ 

‘I  want  Mr.
What  evil  it  saith 
I  do  not  know;  but  I  trace  here  a  copy  of  it,  lest  it  fade 
beyond  recall.
We  shall  have  to  scour  the  lands  all  round  for 
many  long  leagues  before  any  move  is  made.
And  what  is  more, 
the  Bridge  and  the  East  Road  near  the  borders  will  certainly 
be  watched,  whether  any  Rider  gets  into  Buckland  or  not.
‘Come!’  said  Aragorn.
Frodo  looked 
out  eastward  and  gazed  at  the  tall  island.
He  has  no  fear.
‘The  men  of  Carn 
Dum  came  on  us  at  night,  and  we  were  worsted.
If  we 
meet  him,  I’ll  do  the  talking.
It  was 
like  this:  I  saw  a  log  with  eyes!’ 

‘The  log’s  all  right,’  said  Frodo.
At  last  Frodo  spoke  to  Pippin  and 
Sam:  ‘I  ought  to  have  guessed  it  from  the  way  the  gatekeeper 
greeted  us,’  he  said.
Not  Elves;  for  the  woodland  folk  were  altogether  noiseless 
in  their  movements.
He  was  tall  and 
black-like,  and  he  stooped  over  me.
Haldir  knocked  and  spoke,  and  the  gates  opened  sound¬ 
lessly;  but  of  guards  Frodo  could  see  no  sign.
One  or  two  gave  Frodo  a  black  look  and  departed 
muttering  among  themselves.
‘Look,’  he  said,  pointing  downwards.
He  saw  one.’ 

‘Says  he  did,  perhaps.
For  tonight  you  are  under  the  roof  of  T om  Bombadil.
The  Elves 
brought  you  from  the  Ford  on  the  night  of  the  twentieth,  and 
that  is  where  you  lost  count.
‘You  need  rest 
before  your  venture,  if  go  you  must.’  He  laid  his  hand  on  the 
hobbit’s  shoulder  in  friendly  fashion;  but  Frodo  felt  the  hand 
trembling  with  suppressed  excitement.
I  don’t  care.
But,  of  course,  it  was  not  a  complete  protection.
In  the  morning 
they  went  on  again,  walking  without  haste.
Thirdly  and  finally,  he  said,  I  wish  to  make  an 


40 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


ANNOUNCEMENT.
Days  passed  and  The  Day  drew  nearer.
What  am  I  to  do?
‘The  Shire!’  he  cried,  and  springing 
beside  Boromir,  he  stooped,  and  stabbed  with  Sting  at  the 
hideous  foot.
‘There  is  a  path  here!’  he  cried.
The  Company 
stood  rooted  with  horror  staring  into  the  pit.
And,’  he  added,  with  a  glint  in  his  eyes  under  their 
bristling  brows,  ‘you  may  ask  what  is  the  use  of  my  deeds 
when  they  are  proved  useless.
Goldberry  is  wait¬ 
ing.
Frodo’s  pain  had  redoubled, 
and  during  the  day  things  about  him  faded  to  shadows  of 
ghostly  grey.
I  suppose  you  feel  that  everything  has  gone  off 
splendidly  and  according  to  plan?’ 

‘Yes,  I  do,’  said  Bilbo.
‘He  cannot  stand  alone!’  cried  Aragorn  suddenly  and  ran 
back  along  the  bridge.
A  little  addition  of 
your  own,  I  suppose?’ 

‘It  was.
Excuse  me  now.
Whether  they’ve  made  the  land, 
or  the  land’s  made  them,  it’s  hard  to  say,  if  you  take  my 
meaning.
It  has  grown,  and  I  have  not.
Maggot  brought  out  beer  in  a  huge  jug,  and 
filled  four  large  mugs.
It  glanced  upon  Tol  Brandir 
-  he  threw  himself  from  the  seat,  crouching,  covering  his 
head  with  his  grey  hood.
‘Do  Elves  live  in  those  woods?’  he  asked.
‘It  might  be  a  sign  left  by  Gandalf, 
though  one  cannot  be  sure.
‘Very  well,’  said  Bilbo,  ‘it  goes  to  Frodo  with  all  the  rest.’ 
He  drew  a  deep  breath.
The  mournful 
howling  of  the  wolves  was  heard  again.
A 
shrill  yell  went  up:  they  had  been  seen.
As  he  stepped 
down  he  slipped  it  on  his  finger,  and  he  was  never  seen  by 
any  hobbit  in  Hobbiton  again.
But 
he  cannot  alter  the  Ring  itself,  nor  break  its  power  over  others.
‘The  trees  and  the  grasses  and  all  things  growing  or 
living  in  the  land  belong  each  to  themselves.
Frodo  looked  up.
Hobbits  do  not  like  heights,  and 
do  not  sleep  upstairs,  even  when  they  have  any  stairs.
Drogo 
Baggins;  there  was  never  much  to  tell  of  him,  till  he  was 
drownded.’ 

‘Drownded?’  said  several  voices.
The  chief  danger  is  that  the 
poor  beast  is  probably  at  death’s  door.
‘Walking  for  pleasure!
He  led  the 
way,  and  Aragorn  followed  him.
‘Good-bye,  Frodo!’  he  said.
Inside  Bag  End,  Bilbo  and  Gandalf  were  sitting  at  the  open 
window  of  a  small  room  looking  out  west  on  to  the  garden.
As  they  peered  out  from  among  the 
bushes,  they  could  see  the  Road,  faint  and  grey  in  the  failing 
light,  some  thirty  feet  below  them.
It  is  red.
And  on  the  other 
side  the  snow  suddenly  grows  less,  while  further  down  it  is 
no  more  than  a  white  coverlet  to  cool  a  hobbit’s  toes.’ 

‘Ah,  it  is  as  I  said,’  growled  Gimli.
They  spent  a  miserable  day  in  this  lonely  and  unpleasant 
country.
But  I  cannot  see  him  from  afar,  unless 
he  comes  within  the  fences  of  Lothlorien:  a  grey  mist  is  about 
him,  and  the  ways  of  his  feet  and  of  his  mind  are  hidden 
from  me.’ 

‘Alas!’  said  Aragorn.
At 
this  point  the  Road  had  left  the  Hoarwell  far  behind  in  its 
narrow  valley,  and  now  clung  close  to  the  feet  of  the  hills, 
rolling  and  winding  eastward  among  woods  and  heather- 
covered  slopes  towards  the  Ford  and  the  Mountains.
‘And  you?’  she  said,  turning  to  Sam.
‘It’s 
gone  again!
‘Ride  forward!
But,  of  course,  they  would  have  to  pass  through 
the  marshes  themselves,  and  Strider’s  description  of  them 
was  not  encouraging.
He  bade  them 
lie  there  ‘free  to  all  finders,  birds,  beasts,  Elves  or  Men,  and 
all  kindly  creatures’;  for  so  the  spell  of  the  mound  should  be 
broken  and  scattered  and  no  Wight  ever  come  back  to  it.
Standing  suddenly  up  he 
burst  out: 

All  that  is  gold  does  not  glitter, 

Not  all  those  who  wander  are  lost; 

The  old  that  is  strong  does  not  wither, 

Deep  roots  are  not  reached  by  the  frost.
‘I  have 
seen  a  bright  ring  in  the  Halfling’s  hand;  but  Isildur  perished 
ere  this  age  of  the  world  began,  they  say.
It  is  the 
food  and  stores  that  trouble  me.
Come  back!
‘It’s 
going  to  be  a  fine  night,’  he  said  aloud.
If  we  could  find  a 
window  it  would  help,  but  I  fear  that  the  light  comes  only 
down  deep  shafts.’ 

Following  his  lead  the  Company  passed  under  the  northern 
arch.
Do  you  still  hold 
to  your  word,  Frodo,  that  you  will  be  the  Ring-bearer?’ 

‘I  do,’  said  Frodo.
Coming!’  A  cheery-looking  hobbit  bobbed 
out  of  a  door,  and  seeing  the  travellers,  stopped  short  and 
stared  at  them  with  great  interest.
Yet 
they  will  not  give  you  counsel:  in  the  end  you  must  leave 
them  and  the  River,  and  turn  west  -  or  east.’ 

Aragorn  thanked  Celeborn  many  times.
Sam!
‘  “I  will  go  to  Saruman,”  I  said.
Through  the  gate  there  now  appeared  a  broad  thick-set 
hobbit  with  a  round  red  face.
Lurking  by  a  stagnant  mere,  peering  in  the  water  as  the  dark 
eve  fell,  I  caught  him,  Gollum.
As  the 
third  day  of  their  voyage  wore  on  the  lands  changed  slowly: 
the  trees  thinned  and  then  failed  altogether.
No  mallorn  lifted 
its  gold-hung  boughs  beyond  the  Land  of  Lorien.
It  nearly  broke  me.
I  was  right,  you  see.
‘  “Then  you  must  go  now,”  said  Radagast;  “for  I  have 
wasted  time  in  looking  for  you,  and  the  days  are  running 
short.
All  about  Crickhollow  there  was  the 
sound  of  horns  blowing,  and  voices  crying  and  feet  running.
On  the  south-eastern  side  the  ground  fell  very  steeply,  as 
if  the  slopes  of  the  hill  were  continued  far  down  under  the 
trees,  like  island-shores  that  really  are  the  sides  of  a  mountain 
rising  out  of  deep  waters.
Sam  walked  beside 
him,  saying  nothing,  but  sniffing  the  air,  and  looking  every 
now  and  again  with  wonder  in  his  eyes  at  the  great  heights 
in  the  East.
‘That  is  not  well.
Even  as  they  gazed,  the  Silverlode  passed  out  into  the 
currents  of  the  Great  River,  and  their  boats  turned  and  began 
to  speed  southward.
They  had  just  dismounted 
to  lead  their  ponies  up  the  last  steep  slope,  when  suddenly 
Frodo  stopped.
In  any  case,  I  judge  that  the 
younger  of  these  two,  Peregrin  Took,  should  remain.
‘I’ve  got  things 
to  do,’  he  said:  ‘my  making  and  my  singing,  my  talking  and 
my  walking,  and  my  watching  of  the  country.
He  was 
leaning  on  Merry  and  Frodo,  and  he  was  shivering.
Of 
the  ten  companions  who  had  survived  the  Battle  of  Five 
Armies  seven  were  still  with  him:  Dwalin,  Gloin,  Dori,  Nori, 
Bifur,  Bofur,  and  Bombur.
Sam  on  his  knees  was  now  slashing  at  it  with  a  knife.
For  so  it  seemed  to  them:  Lorien 
was  slipping  backward,  like  a  bright  ship  masted  with 
enchanted  trees,  sailing  on  to  forgotten  shores,  while  they  sat 
helpless  upon  the  margin  of  the  grey  and  leafless  world.
But  you  need  not  fear:  my  horse  will  not  let  any 
rider  fall  that  I  command  him  to  bear.
I  wish  he  had  never 
found  it,  and  that  I  had  not  got  it!
Some  like  lungs,  terrible  and 
splendid;  and  some  as  merry  as  children.
We  don’t  want  to  go  that  way!
The  Ring  gleamed  and  flickered  as 
he  held  it  up  before  them  in  his  trembling  hand.
All  that 
lies  north  of  Rohan  is  now  to  us  so  far  away  that  fancy  can 
wander  freely  there.
‘There  are  the  emblems  of  Dunn!’  cried  Gimli.
He  knows  that  it  is  a 
Great  Ring,  for  it  gave  long  life.
Leaving  the  road  they  went  into  the  deep  resin- 
scented  darkness  of  the  trees,  and  gathered  dead  sticks  and 
cones  to  make  a  fire.
Sam  looked  at  Frodo.
On  he  led  them,  into  the  mouth  of  darkness, 
and  still  on  under  the  deep  clouded  night.
We  have  been  long  in  the  wilderness, 
and  you  need  news  of  what  the  Enemy  is  doing  before  you 
make  a  move.
‘I  shall  be 
as  thin  as  a  willow-wand,  I’m  sure,  before  I  get  to  Buckland.
Butterbur  looked  sleepy  and  frightened.
Earendil  was  a  mariner 
that  tarried  in  Arvernien; 
he  built  a  boat  of  timber  felled 
in  Nimbrethil  to  journey  in; 
her  sails  he  wove  of  silver  fair, 
of  silver  were  her  lanterns  made, 
her  prow  he  fashioned  like  a  swan, 
and  light  upon  her  banners  laid.
You  have  obviously  been  planning  to  go  and  saying 
farewell  to  all  your  haunts  all  this  year  since  April.
On  the  top  they  found,  as  Strider  had  said,  a  wide  ring  of 
ancient  stone -work,  now  crumbling  or  covered  with  age-long 
grass.
It 
has  felt  so  cold  through  the  long  nights.
Every  now  and  again  they  caught, 
among  many  a  derry  dol  and  a  merry  dol  and  a  ring  a  ding 
dillo  the  repeated  words: 

Old  Tom  Bombadil  is  a  merry  fellow; 

Bright  blue  his  jacket  is,  and  his  boots  are  yellow.
Then 
leaving  it  they  turned  left  and  took  quietly  to  the  fields  again.
‘You  should 
never  have  gone  mixing  yourself  up  with  Hobbiton  folk,  Mr.
Bilbo  was  going  to  be 
eleventy-one,  ill,  a  rather  curious  number,  and  a  very  re¬ 
spectable  age  for  a  hobbit  (the  Old  Took  himself  had  only 
reached  130);  and  Frodo  was  going  to  be  thirty-three,  33,  an 
important  number:  the  date  of  his  ‘coming  of  age’.
‘I  have  made  up  my 
mind,’  he  said  finally.
Boromir  will  return  to  his  own  city,  where  his 
father  and  his  people  need  him;  and  with  him  the  others 
should  go,  or  at  least  Meriadoc  and  Peregrin,  if  Legolas  is 
not  willing  to  leave  us.’ 

‘That  won’t  do  at  all!’  cried  Merry.
The  sun  was  down,  and  a  cool  pale  evening  was  quietly 
fading  into  night.
‘There!’  he  cried  after  a  moment,  drawing  his  hand  across 
his  brow.
It  seemed  that  he  was  learned 
in  old  lore,  as  well  as  in  the  ways  of  the  wild.
There  are  many  maps  in  Elrond’s  house,  but  I  suppose  you 
never  thought  to  look  at  them?’ 

‘Yes  I  did,  sometimes,’  said  Pippin,  ‘but  I  don’t  remember 
them.
Pippin,  not  liking  to  show  Strider  that  he  was 
still  afraid,  went  on  ahead  with  Merry.
The  other  guests  in  the  inn  were  at 
the  doors  or  hanging  out  of  the  windows.
Our  Sam  says 
that  everyone’s  going  to  be  invited  to  the  party,  and  there’s 
going  to  be  presents,  mark  you,  presents  for  all  -  this  very 
month  as  is.’ 


32 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


That  very  month  was  September,  and  as  fine  as  you  could 
ask.
THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


363 


I  sit  beside  the  fire  and  think 
of  people  long  ago, 
and  people  who  will  see  a  world 
that  I  shall  never  know.
On  a  seat  cut  in  the  stone  beside  a  turn  in  the  path  they 
came  upon  Gandalf  and  Bilbo  deep  in  talk.
We  guessed  you’d  come  ere  long  down  to 
the  water:  all  paths  lead  that  way,  down  to  Withywindle.
Ho!
After  breakfast,  which  they  again  ate  alone,  they  made 
ready  to  say  farewell,  as  nearly  heavy  of  heart  as  was  possible 
on  such  a  morning:  cool,  bright,  and  clean  under  a  washed 
autumn  sky  of  thin  blue.
‘Do  not  drink  of  it!
For  many  long  years  I  had  pondered  what 
I  might  do,  should  the  Great  Ring  come  into  my  hands,  and 
behold!
‘What  did  I  tell  you,  Mr.
‘Yes:  I  found  him  some  way  up  the  hill,  and  I  spoke 
to  him.
Those  were  happier  times.
‘If  I  just 
vanish  like  Bilbo,  the  tale  will  be  all  over  the  Shire  in  no  time.’ 

‘Of  course  you  mustn’t  vanish!’  said  Gandalf.
The  people  of 
the  woods  did  not  delve  in  the  ground  like  Dwarves,  nor 
build  strong  places  of  stone  before  the  Shadow  came.’ 

‘And  even  in  these  latter  days  dwelling  in  the  trees  might 
be  thought  safer  than  sitting  on  the  ground,’  said  Gimli.
There  have  been  scorching  flames 
here;  and  now  the  light  that  we  saw  three  nights  ago  in  the 
eastern  sky  comes  back  to  my  mind.
Sam  and  Pippin  sat  near,  and  they  began  to  hum, 
and  then  to  sing  softly: 

Ho!
But  old  Rory  Brandybuck  was  not  so  sure.
Sauron  was  dimin¬ 
ished,  but  not  destroyed.
‘Can  we - ’  began  Frodo.
‘I  don’t  think  you  under¬ 
stand  my  master  at  all.
‘Let  the  guide  go  first  while  you  have  one.’ 

‘This  seems  to  have  been  a  guardroom,  made  for  the 
watching  of  the  three  passages,’  said  Gimli.
but  wait  a  minute!
Though 
you  should  find  all  barren  and  laid  waste,  there  will  be  few 
gardens  in  Middle-earth  that  will  bloom  like  your  garden, 
if  you  sprinkle  this  earth  there.
There  lies  the 
Mirrormere,  and  there  the  River  Silverlode  rises  in  its  icy 
springs.’ 

‘Dark  is  the  water  of  Kheled-zaram,’  said  Gimli,  ‘and  cold 
are  the  springs  of  Kibil-nala.
For  the  whatever-it-was  was  coming 
along  fast  now  and  getting  close  behind  Gimli.
The  Enemy 
is  moving.’ 

There  was  a  long  silence.
And  more  are  coming.
Sam  dis¬ 
appeared.
It  fell  into  the  Great  River,  Anduin, 
and  vanished.
‘Go 
on!’  said  Frodo.
I  will  return  as  soon  as  I  can;  and  I  will  follow 
you,  if  I  find  that  you  are  gone.
Now  far  ahead  the  Road  has  gone, 

And  I  must  follow,  if  I  can, 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


47 


Pursuing  it  with  eager  feet, 

Until  it  joins  some  larger  way 
Where  many  paths  and  errands  meet.
When  he  saw  Strider,  he  dismounted  and  ran  to  meet  him 
calling  out:  Ai  na  vedui  Dunadan!
‘But  that  is  the  best  I 
can  do  yet.’ 

‘Well,  Mr.
‘You  shouldn’t  listen  to  all  you  hear,  Sandyman,’  said  the 
Gaffer,  who  did  not  much  like  the  miller.
You 
were  pale  and  cold,  and  they  feared  that  you  were  dead,  or 
worse.
Then  I  couldn’t  find 
nobody  willing  to  go  to  the  Shire  next  day,  nor  the  day  after, 
and  none  of  my  own  folk  were  to  spare;  and  then  one  thing 
after  another  drove  it  out  of  my  mind.
Then  they 
lay  basking  in  the  sun  with  the  delight  of  those  that  have  been 
wafted  suddenly  from  bitter  winter  to  a  friendly  clime,  or  of 
people  that,  after  being  long  ill  and  bedridden,  wake  one  day 
to  find  that  they  are  unexpectedly  well  and  the  day  is  again 
full  of  promise.
The  dull  grey  hours  passed  without  event.
These  must  be 
the  very  three  that  were  caught  by  Gandalf,  quarrelling  over 
the  right  way  to  cook  thirteen  dwarves  and  one  hobbit.’ 

‘I  had  no  idea  we  were  anywhere  near  the  place!’  said 
Pippin.
I 
shall  have  such  need  of  it.
He  was  alone  and  felt  rather  forlorn,  although  all 
about  him  the  folk  of  Rivendell  were  gathered.
Tom 
was  moving  about  the  room  whistling  like  a  starling.
Baggins.
In  dark  and  loneliness 
they  are  strongest;  they  will  not  openly  attack  a  house  where 
there  are  lights  and  many  people  -  not  until  they  are  des¬ 
perate,  not  while  all  the  long  leagues  of  Eriador  still  lie  before 
us.
Anyway: 
there  it  is.
Pippin  declared  that  Frodo  was  looking  twice  the  hobbit 
that  he  had  been.
He  seemed  all  the  time  to  be  climbing 
up  and  up.
There  is  a  wholesome  air  about  Hollin.
They  will  know  all  the  news  now,  for 
they  have  visited  Bill  Ferny;  and  probably  that  Southerner 
was  a  spy  as  well.
In  the  night  little  folk  wake  up  in  the  darkness,  and 
sleep  after  light  has  come!
That  cheered 
them  greatly;  for  it  was  good  to  see  a  sight  of  anything  beyond 
the  wood’s  borders,  though  they  did  not  mean  to  go  that  way, 
if  they  could  help  it:  the  Barrow-downs  had  as  sinister  a 
reputation  in  hobbit-legend  as  the  Forest  itself.
‘It  was  taken  from  him,’  said  Gandalf.
Five-and- 
forty  leagues  as  the  crow  flies  we  have  come,  though  many 
long  miles  further  our  feet  have  walked.
It  was  now  past  mid-day,  and  they  felt  it  was  high 
time  for  lunch.
Come!
They  took  a  deep  draught  of  the  air,  and  felt  that  a  skip  and 
a  few  stout  strides  would  bear  them  wherever  they  wished.
At  length  they  made  up  their  minds  to  go  on  again.
Gandalf  halted.
Frodo  felt  a  great  weariness  come  over  him.
The  light  faded,  and  the  leaves  on  the  bushes  rustled  softly.
But  now  alas!
And  how  shall  I  refuse,  since  I  commanded  him 
to  speak?
What  the  wizard  guessed  was  always 
difficult  to  tell.
He  is  here  no  longer,  and  we  must  now  look  after  ourselves 
and  make  our  own  way  to  Rivendell,  as  best  we  can.’ 

‘How  far  is  Rivendell?’  asked  Merry,  gazing  round  wearily.
He  spoke  sternly.
Is  nothing  safe?’ 

‘Not  too  safe,  I  should  say,’  said  Merry.
Rain  may  fall  and  wind  may  blow, 

And  many  miles  be  still  to  go, 

But  under  a  tall  tree  I  will  lie, 

And  let  the  clouds  go  sailing  by.
They  strained  their  eyes,  and  the  shadows 
seemed  to  grow.
‘He’s  often  away  from  home.
Great  trees 
passed  by  like  ghosts,  thrusting  their  twisted  thirsty  roots 
through  the  mist  down  into  the  water.
Senses,  too,  there  are  other  than  sight  or  smell.
It  would  be  more  homelike.’ 

‘What’s  wrong  with  the  inn?’  said  Frodo.
Gandalf  will  get  votes 
easier  in  the  light  of  the  morning  than  in  this  cold  gloom.
What  are  his  counsels  to  us  in  this  need?
This 
is  a  merry  meeting!
The  Name¬ 
less  Enemy  has  arisen  again.
Verily  it  is  in  the  land  of  Lorien  upon  the  finger  of  Galadriel 
that  one  of  the  Three  remains.
Dark  yawned  the  archway  of  the  Gates 
under  the  mountain-shadow.
Lor  bless  me,  sir,  but  I  do  love  tales  of 
that  sort.
I  must  see  it  through,  sir,  if 
you  understand  me.’ 

‘I  don’t  altogether.
The  stable-doors  had 
all  been  opened  in  the  night,  and  they  were  gone:  not  only 
Merry’s  ponies,  but  every  other  horse  and  beast  in  the  place.
In  that  case  to  enter  Moria 
would  be  to  walk  into  a  trap,  hardly  better  than  knocking  at 
the  gates  of  the  Dark  Tower  itself.
Gollum  is  a  liar,  and  you  have  to  sift  his  words.
But  tonight 
let  us  speak  of  merrier  things!’ 

Gloin  began  then  to  talk  of  the  works  of  his  people,  telling 
Frodo  about  their  great  labours  in  Dale  and  under  the  Moun¬ 
tain.
FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS  189 

‘Here  are  your  ponies,  now!’  he  said.
Many 
people  from  other  parts  of  the  Shire  were  also  asked;  and 
there  were  even  a  few  from  outside  the  borders.
‘None  of  us  should  be 
alone.
A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


45 


‘I  don’t  know  what  has  come  over  you,  Gandalf,’  he  said.
A  little  way  off  he  heard 
a  harsh  laugh  and  the  tread  of  many  feet  on  the  ground 
below.
‘Take  it,  if  you  like.
‘It  seems  to  be  a  record  of  the 
fortunes  of  Balin’s  folk,’  he  said.
There  was  among  them  a  family  of  high  repute,  for  it 
was  large  and  wealthier  than  most,  and  it  was  ruled  by  a 
grandmother  of  the  folk,  stern  and  wise  in  old  lore,  such  as 
they  had.
They  stole  quietly  out  of  the 
house.
Then  you  will 
see  Gandalf  the  Grey  uncloaked.’  He  took  a  step  towards  the 
hobbit,  and  he  seemed  to  grow  tall  and  menacing;  his  shadow 
filled  the  little  room.
No  time  now.
‘If  Gandalf  would  go  before  us  with  a  bright  flame,  he 
might  melt  a  path  for  you,’  said  Legolas.
Therefore  it 
must  be  shunned.
We  must  go  down  the  Silverlode  into  the  secret 
woods,  and  so  to  the  Great  River,  and  then - ’ 

He  paused.
‘You  shall 
come  home  with  me!
After  all  Fatty  and  I  only  got  here  with  the 
last  cart-load  yesterday.’ 

Frodo  looked  round.
It  belongs  to  Sauron  and  was 
made  by  him  alone,  and  is  altogether  evil.
They  rode  down 
the  guards  at  the  gate  and  vanished  from  the  Shire.
So  much  only  in  this  hour  of  doubt  I  may  now  say.
The  mist  cleared 
and  he  saw  a  sight  which  he  had  never  seen  before  but  knew 
at  once:  the  Sea.
He  was  cloaked  and  booted  as  if  for  a  journey  on  horse¬ 
back;  and  indeed  though  his  garments  were  rich,  and  his 
cloak  was  lined  with  fur,  they  were  stained  with  long  travel.
All  of  them,  it  seemed,  had  fared  alike:  each  had  felt  that 
he  was  offered  a  choice  between  a  shadow  full  of  fear  that 
lay  ahead,  and  something  that  he  greatly  desired:  clear  before 
his  mind  it  lay,  and  to  get  it  he  had  only  to  turn  aside  from 
the  road  and  leave  the  Quest  and  the  war  against  Sauron  to 
others.
I  wish  to  find  him.
I  am  dreadfully 
anxious  about  him.
Proudfoots,  repeated  Bilbo.
Have  I 
not  earnestly  studied  this  matter?
Their  hearts  were  heavy;  for  it  was  a 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


483 


fair  place,  and  it  had  become  like  home  to  them,  though  they 
could  not  count  the  days  and  nights  that  they  had  passed 
there.
A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


249 


Rangers  passed  at  times  beyond  the  hills,  but  they  were  few 
and  did  not  stay.
That  is 
far  south  in  Isengard,  in  the  end  of  the  Misty  Mountains,  not 
far  from  the  Gap  of  Rohan.
‘  We  drove  out  ores  from  the  great  gate  and  guard  -  I  think; 
the  next  word  is  blurred  and  burned:  probably  room  -  we  slew 
many  in  the  bright  -  I  think  -  sun  in  the  dale.
There  is  always  a  fire  here,  all 
the  year  round,  but  there  is  little  other  light.’ 


300  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

As  Elrond  entered  and  went  towards  the  seat  prepared  for 
him,  Elvish  minstrels  began  to  make  sweet  music.
‘Well,  we  all  like 
walking  in  the  dark,’  he  said,  ‘so  let’s  put  some  miles  behind 
us  before  bed.’ 

For  a  short  way  they  followed  the  lane  westwards.
‘Of  course,  my  dear  Bilbo,’  said  Gandalf.
He  could  see  no  sign  of 
Strider.
Where 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  529 

to?
And  Boromir  will  tell  you  that 
that  is  a  great  open  vale  that  lies  between  the  Misty  Mountains 
and  the  northmost  foothills  of  Ered  Nimrais,  the  White 
Mountains  of  his  home.
Good  luck  to 
you!’  He  turned  away  and  looked  out  of  the  window,  trying 
to  hum  a  tune.
But  I’m  getting  to  know 
some  of  the  ways  of  the  place.’ 

‘I  know  what  you  have  been  doing,  Sam,’  said  Frodo, 
taking  his  arm.
Doom.
The  room  looked 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  169 

westward  over  the  mist-clouded  valley,  and  the  window  was 
open.
They  had 
forgotten  all  about  Merry,  and  it  was  getting  late.
‘But  come, 
you  shall  look  and  see  what  you  may.
‘I  am  no  weather-master,’  said  he;  ‘nor  is  aught  that 
goes  on  two  legs.’ 

By  his  advice  they  decided  to  make  nearly  due  North  from 
his  house,  over  the  western  and  lower  slopes  of  the  Downs: 
they  might  hope  in  that  way  to  strike  the  East  Road  in  a  day’s 
journey,  and  avoid  the  Barrows.
Funny  you  should 
ask  about  him.’  But  at  that  moment  Mr.
But  the  world  is 
changing.
‘Yet  such  as  we  are  we  will  try  it,’  said  Aragorn.
There  they  hastily 
kindled  fire;  for  Glorfindel  knew  that  a  flood  would  come 
down,  if  the  Riders  tried  to  cross,  and  then  he  would  have  to 
deal  with  any  that  were  left  on  his  side  of  the  river.
I  looked  on  it  and  saw  that,  whereas  it  had  once  been  green 
and  fair,  it  was  now  filled  with  pits  and  forges.
Bilbo’s  first  cousin  on  the  mother’s  side  (her  mother  being 
the  youngest  of  the  Old  Took’s  daughters);  and  Mr.
The  news:  no  fire,  and  a  move  again  by  night,  had  been 
broken  to  him,  as  soon  as  he  woke  in  the  late  afternoon.
‘No,  I’ll  go  home  by  the 
long  road  with  Mr.
At  length  they  too  passed  from  sight.
Looking  up  he  saw  before  him  a  tall  white  tower,  standing 
alone  on  a  high  ridge.
You  fear  them,  but  you  do  not  fear  them  enough, 
yet.
It  is  long  indeed  since  we 
saw  one  of  Durin’s  folk  in  Caras  Galadhon.
But 
Aragorn  and  Boromir  made  no  sign.
Suddenly  Aragorn  leapt  to  his  feet.
I  insist  on  seeing 
the  will.’ 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


51 


Otho  would  have  been  Bilbo’s  heir,  but  for  the  adoption 
of  Frodo.
It  would  comfort  us 
to  know  that  others  fought  also  with  all  the  means  that  they 
have.’ 

‘Then  be  comforted,’  said  Elrond.
How  soon  could  the  Riders  get  to  Bucldebury?
Folk  might 
welcome  it  there.’  Except  on  the  high  moors  of  the  North¬ 
farthing  a  heavy  fall  was  rare  in  the  Shire,  and  was  regarded 
as  a  pleasant  event  and  a  chance  for  fun.
At  least  I  beg  you  not  to  use  it  in  any 
way  that  will  cause  talk  or  rouse  suspicion.
But  from  her  the  lineage  of  the  Elf-lords  of  old 
descended  among  Men.
The  hobbits  did  not  pay  much  attention  to  all  this,  as  it 
did  not  at  the  moment  seem  to  concern  hobbits.
Once  or  twice  he  spoke  to  Strider 
in  the  elf-tongue.
‘I  will  do  as  you  bid.
‘You  are  too  hard  now  to 
slap!
Now  you  have  seen  the  sword  that 
you  have  sought,  what  would  you  ask?
Do  not  the 
Elf-lords  keep  them?
‘Would  he  not  take  the  Ring  and  keep  it  there, 
for  ever  harmless?’ 

‘No,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘not  willingly.
Must  they  swim?’ 

‘No!’  said  Haldir.
Boromir  set  his 
shoulder  against  the  western  door.
Suddenly  they  turned  away, 
and  a  shadowy  figure  slipped  round  the  trunk  of  the  tree  and 
vanished.
I  suppose  that  you  will  see  him 
before  you  leave  the  Shire?’ 

‘I  hope  so.
Behind  him  came  Gimli,  his  eyes  glinting 
in  the  dim  light  as  he  turned  his  head  from  side  to  side.
‘And  what  do  you  think  that  was?’  Pippin  asked  at  last, 
trying  to  speak  lightly,  but  quavering  a  little.
‘That  is  a  very  long  story.
In  the  next  day  or  two,  as  they  went  on,  borne  steadily 
southwards,  this  feeling  of  insecurity  grew  on  all  the  Com¬ 
pany.
‘You  be  careful  of  yourself,  Maggot!’  she  called.
But  the  Black  Riders  rode  like  a  gale  to  the  North-gate.
He  fell  and 
cut  his  knees.
Or  why  do  the  Nine  ask 
for  the  Shire,  and  what  is  your  business  there?”  As  he  said 
this  a  lust  which  he  could  not  conceal  shone  suddenly  in  his 
eyes.
‘I  do  not  like  the  feel  of  the  middle  way;  and  I  do  not 
like  the  smell  of  the  left-hand  way:  there  is  foul  air  down 
there,  or  I  am  no  guide.
A  few  low  trees  grew  there 
close  to  the  water,  and  behind  them  rose  a  steep  rocky  hank.
We  want  to  go  on.’ 

‘That’s  what  I  meant,’  said  Pippin.
And  do  you  remember  the  report  of  the  Elves  that 
went  after  the  ore-band?’ 

‘Ah,’  said  Sam,  ‘I  do;  and  I  remember  more  too.
‘I  galloped  to  Weathertop  like  a  gale,  and  I  reached  it  before 
sundown  on  my  second  day  from  Bree  -  and  they  were  there 
before  me.
But  soon  he  was  betrayed  by  it  to  his 
death;  and  so  it  is  named  in  the  North  Isildur’s  Bane.
‘Well,  Sam!’  he  said.
Bilbo  comes  up  the  Hill 
with  a  pony  and  some  mighty  big  bags  and  a  couple  of  chests.
‘Come  on!
But  Gondor  stands,  and  even  the 
end  of  its  strength  is  still  very  strong.’ 

‘And  yet  its  vigilance  can  no  longer  keep  back  the  Nine,’ 
said  Galdor.
‘That  was  the  sound  of  a  hammer,  or  I  have  never  heard 
one,’  said  Gimli.
Three  of  the  servants  of  Sauron  were  upon  the  Bridge,  but 
they  withdrew  and  I  pursued  them  westward.
The  lawn  ran  out  into  a  narrow  tongue 
between  bright  margins:  on  the  right  and  west  the  Silverlode 
flowed  glittering;  on  the  left  and  east  the  Great  River  rolled 
its  broad  waters,  deep  and  dark.
Now  you  shall  rest,  and  we  will  not  speak  of  your 
further  road  for  a  while.’ 

That  night  the  Company  slept  upon  the  ground,  much  to 
the  satisfaction  of  the  hobbits.
But  do  not  trust  my  guess;  for  I  cannot 
tell  for  certain.
‘It  was 
this  accursed  knife  that  gave  the  wound.
Suddenly  as  they  drew  nearer  a  terrific  baying  and  barking 
broke  out,  and  a  loud  voice  was  heard  shouting:  ‘Grip!
Then  through  all  the  years  that  followed  he  traced  the 
Ring;  but  since  that  history  is  elsewhere  recounted,  even  as 


3i6 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Elrond  himself  set  it  down  in  his  books  of  lore,  it  is  not  here 
recalled.
‘Now,  my  little  fellows,  where  be  you  a-going  to,  puffing 
like  a  bellows?
‘Here  is  the  spring  from  which  the  Silverlode  rises,’  said 
Gimli.
‘When  all  have  come  we  will  speak  together.’ 

Each  of  the  companions  he  greeted  courteously  by  name 
as  they  entered.
‘Well,  now  I  have  at  least  some  notion  of  where  we  are!’ 
said  Merry.
He  just  vanished  into 
thin  air,  in  a  manner  of  speaking.’ 

‘You  don’t  say,  Mr.
Against 
refusal  of  the  burden  that  is  laid  on  me.
A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS  117 

‘Why,  this  is  the  Stock-brook!’  said  Pippin.
Maggot  will  be 
worriting  with  the  night  getting  thick.’ 

He  backed  the  waggon  into  the  lane  and  turned  it.
Not  very  expensive  ones,  as  a  rule,  and  not 
so  lavishly  as  on  this  occasion;  but  it  was  not  a  bad  system.
By  midnight  they  had  climbed  to  the  knees  of  the 
great  mountains.
The  Brandybucks  and  their 
numerous  dependants  then  began  to  burrow,  and  later  to 
build,  all  round  about.
‘Not  bad,’  Bilbo  said  to  him.
They  could  go  no  further  without  choice 
between  the  east-way  and  the  west.
Each  year  at  summer’s  end  I  go  to  find  them  for  her, 
in  a  wide  pool,  deep  and  clear,  far  down  Withywindle; 
there  they  open  first  in  spring  and  there  they  linger  latest.
‘I  thought  I  knew  the 
elf-letters,  but  I  cannot  read  these.’ 

‘The  words  are  in  the  elven-tongue  of  the  West  of  Middle- 
earth  in  the  Elder  Days,’  answered  Gandalf.
No  others  that  dwelt  in  the  wide  world 
had  voices  so  fair  to  hear.
Suddenly  he  spoke,  aloud  but  as  if  to  himself, 
saying  slowly: 

The  Road  goes  ever  on  and  on 
Down  from  the  door  where  it  began.
‘Whether  they 
are  good  or  evil,  or  have  nothing  to  do  with  us  at  all,  we  must 
go  down  at  once.
‘A  dwarf!’  said  Haldir.
He  wondered 
how  many  private  talks  he  would  have  before  he  got  to  bed, 
and  what  they  would  reveal.
help!
But  we  cannot  linger  there.”  Now  long  shall  I 
journey  ere  I  have  joy  again.
And  if 
my  designs  had  not  gone  amiss,  it  would  have  been  governed 
by  Gandalf  the  Grey,  and  then  mayhap  things  would  have 
gone  otherwise.
Indeed  I  spoke  of  them  once  to  you; 
for  the  Black  Riders  are  the  Ringwraiths,  the  Nine  Servants 
of  the  Lord  of  the  Rings.
You  can  learn  all 
that  there  is  to  know  about  their  ways  in  a  month,  and  yet 
after  a  hundred  years  they  can  still  surprise  you  at  a  pinch.
‘You  feel  the 
power  of  the  Lady  of  the  Galadhrim,’  he  said.
There  were  many  birds  about  the  cliffs  and  the  rock- 
chimneys,  and  all  day  high  in  the  air  flocks  of  birds  had  been 
circling,  black  against  the  pale  sky.
Certainly,  if  the  Ring  were  with  the 
Enemy.
But  don’t  let’s  worry  about  it  now  -  let’s 
have  some  real  News!
My  plan  was  to  leave  the  Shire  secretly, 
and  make  my  way  to  Rivendell;  but  now  my  footsteps  are 
dogged,  before  ever  I  get  to  Buckland.’ 


no 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘I  think  you  should  still  follow  that  plan,’  said  Gildor.
It  had  been  officially  announced  that  Sam  was 
coming  to  Buckland  ‘to  do  for  Mr.
THREE  IS  COMPANY 


99 


‘I  can’t  say  why,  but  I  felt  certain  he  was  looking  or  smelling 
for  me;  and  also  I  felt  certain  that  I  did  not  want  him  to 
discover  me.
Let  them  pass!
But  whither  now 
shah  I  go?’ 

The  chasm  was  long  and  dark,  and  filled  with  the  noise  of 
wind  and  rushing  water  and  echoing  stone.
It  gave  me  quite  a 
shudder.
There  was  an  answer,  or  so  he 
thought;  but  it  seemed  to  come  from  behind  him,  away  down 
the  path  further  back  in  the  Forest.
But  perhaps  I  should  not  inquire  too  closely,  since 
Elrond  and  Gandalf  do  not  seem  disposed  to  talk  of  this?’ 

‘I  think  we  will  not  speak  of  it,  at  least  not  yet,’  said  Frodo 
politely.
The  whole  hill  was  crowned  with 
dazzling  light.
‘Don’t  despair!’  said  Strider.
All  folk  desired  it.
All  had 
been  broken  and  plundered;  but  beside  the  shattered  lid  of 
one  there  lay  the  remains  of  a  book.
If  it  still  remains,  we  must  have  passed  it  yesterday  night.
‘There  on  the  mantelpiece.
A  cutting 


144 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


had  been  made,  at  some  distance  from  the  Hedge,  and  went 
sloping  gently  down  into  the  ground.
The  ring  itself  might  tell  if  it  were  the  One.
We  are  late.’ 

The  Company  were  footsore  and  tired;  but  they  trudged 
doggedly  along  the  rough  and  winding  track  for  many  miles.
Pippin  looked  out  of  the  western  window,  down  into  a  pool 
of  mist.
I  had  looked  forward  to  a  real 
good  meal  tonight:  something  hot.’ 

‘Well,  you  can  go  on  looking  forward,’  said  Gandalf.
The  Road  behind 
held  on  its  way  to  the  River  Bruinen,  but  both  were  now 
hidden  from  view.
He  stood  as  he  had  at  times  stood  enchanted  by 
fair  elven-voices;  but  the  spell  that  was  now  laid  upon  him 
was  different:  less  keen  and  lofty  was  the  delight,  but  deeper 
and  nearer  to  mortal  heart;  marvellous  and  yet  not  strange.
They  cannot  be  forced  inwards.’ 

‘What  are  you  going  to  do  then?’  asked  Pippin,  undaunted 
by  the  wizard’s  bristling  brows.
Holly  was  the  token  of  the  people  of 
that  land,  and  they  planted  it  here  to  mark  the  end  of  their 
domain;  for  the  West-door  was  made  chiefly  for  their  use  in 
their  traffic  with  the  Lords  of  Moria.
In  this  way  they  advanced  some  fifteen  miles,  measured  in 


410  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

a  direct  line  east,  though  they  must  have  actually  walked 
twenty  miles  or  more.
I  fell  over.’ 

‘I  found  him,  sir,’  put  in  Nob.
If  there’s  any 
magic  about,  it’s  right  down  deep,  where  I  can’t  lay  my  hands 
on  it,  in  a  manner  of  speaking.’ 

‘You  can  see  and  feel  it  everywhere,’  said  Frodo.
‘But  I  hope  we  shall  get  to  know  one  another 
better.
But  it  seems  to  me  now  clear  which  is  the  road  that  we 
must  take.
Elrond  was  in 
his  chair  and  the  fire  was  on  his  face  like  summer-light  upon 
the  trees.
‘ Naur  an  edraith  ammen!
Now  is  the 
time  for  speech  and  merriment!’ 

Pippin  sat  up  and  rubbed  his  eyes.
The  art  of  Gandalf  improved  with  age.
He  will  have  quite  as  much  chance  of  escap¬ 
ing  wolves  and  getting  home  as  we  have.’ 

Sam  stood  sullenly  by  the  pony  and  returned  no  answer.
For  now  I  am  really  afraid.
Fear  would  have  destroyed  them.
For  Saruman  the 
White  is  the  greatest  of  my  order.
What  may  your  names  be,  might  I  ask?’ 

‘Our  names  and  our  business  are  our  own,  and  this  does 
not  seem  a  good  place  to  discuss  them,’  said  Frodo,  not  liking 
the  look  of  the  man  or  the  tone  of  his  voice.
The  waxing  moon  was 
climbing  slowly  above  the  hill  that  overshadowed  them,  and 
the  stars  above  the  hill-top  faded.
‘I  go  to  find  the  Sun!’  Then 
swift  as  a  runner  over  firm  sand  he  shot  away,  and  quickly 
overtaking  the  toiling  men,  with  a  wave  of  his  hand  he  passed 
them,  and  sped  into  the  distance,  and  vanished  round  the 
rocky  turn.
He 
could  no  longer  see  his  friends.
I  caught  a  glint  of  gold  as  he 
put  something  back  in  his  trouser-pocket.
‘Water!’  shouted  Pippin.
Sam  turned  quickly.
Here  Fatty  Bolger  halted.
I  said  soon,  not  instantly.
Now  as  the  companions  sat  or  walked  together  they  spoke 
of  Gandalf,  and  all  that  each  had  known  and  seen  of  him 
came  clear  before  their  minds.
I  have  heard  his  story:  how  he 
found  it,  and  how  he  used  it:  on  his  journey,  I  mean.’ 

Which  story,  I  wonder,’  said  Gandalf.
The  Dwarves  and  the  two  or 
three  strange  Men  that  still  remained  got  up  and  said  good 
night  to  the  landlord,  but  not  to  Frodo  and  his  friends.
Before  them  was  another  cavernous  hall.
One 
was  the  splash  of  something  heavy  falling  into  the  water;  the 
other  was  a  noise  like  the  snick  of  a  lock  when  a  door  quietly 
closes  fast.
Much  was  said  of  events  in  the  world  outside, 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


313 


especially  in  the  South,  and  in  the  wide  lands  east  of  the 
Mountains.
And,  of 
course,  all  the  chief  treasures,  as  well  as  the  books,  pictures, 
and  more  than  enough  furniture,  were  left  in  his  possession.
‘And  very  cheerless  and 
uninviting  it  looks!
It  will  shine  still  brighter 
when  night  is  about  you.
The  world  looked  wild  and  wide  from  Weathertop.
And  yet  we 
see  that  Sauron  can  torture  and  destroy  the  very  hills.
Soon  they  all  stood  once  more 
on  the  flat  shelf  at  the  head  of  the  steep  slope  where  they  had 
felt  the  first  flakes  of  snow  the  night  before.
‘I  think  I  hear  hoofs  again.’ 

They  stopped  suddenly  and  stood  as  silent  as  tree- 
shadows,  listening.
‘It  was  something  colder.
Tom  sang  most  of  the  time,  but  it  was  chiefly 
nonsense,  or  else  perhaps  a  strange  language  unknown  to  the 
hobbits,  an  ancient  language  whose  words  were  mainly  those 
of  wonder  and  delight.
Many  of  the 
guests,  and  especially  the  Sackville-Bagginses,  were  insulted, 
feeling  sure  they  had  only  been  asked  to  fill  up  the  required 
number,  like  goods  in  a  package.
Ho!
My  Precious.
‘If  that’s 
being  queer,  then  we  could  do  with  a  bit  more  queerness  in 
these  parts.
‘What  did  you  blush  for,  Sam?’  said  Pippin.
Make  for  Rivendell.
Suddenly  Frodo  himself  felt  sleep  overwhelming  him.
‘Welcome  to  Caras  Galadhon!’  he  said.
Anyway,  I  went,  and  suddenly  I  heard  voices  by  the  hedge.
If  I  stay,  I  shall  draw 
them  to  me!’ 

Strider  laid  his  hand  on  his  shoulder.
Then  slowly  on  the 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


397 


surface,  where  the  wizard’s  hands  had  passed,  faint  lines 
appeared,  like  slender  veins  of  silver  running  in  the  stone.
Pippin  chuckled,  but  Sam  looked  indignant.
‘You’ll  find  his  will  and  all  the  other  documents  in  there,  I 
think,’  said  the  wizard.
There  was  another  gate  in  the  southern 
corner  where  the  Road  ran  out  of  the  village.
They  were  troubled,  and  some  spoke  in 
whispers  of  the  Enemy  and  of  the  Land  of  Mordor.
Nothing  hap¬ 
pened.
In  the  dead  night,  Frodo  lay  in  a  dream  without  light.
It 
is  mine  isn’t  it?
He 
showed  no  signs  of  age.
It  appeared  that  a  lot  of  Pippin’s  bath  had  imitated  a 
fountain  and  leaped  on  high.
They  looked  back,  but  they  could 
not  see  far  because  of  the  many  windings  and  rollings  of  the 
Road.
They  decided  to  attempt  the  climb,  but  it  proved  very 
difficult.
It  may  slip  off 
treacherously,  but  its  keeper  never  abandons  it.
For  it  is  clear  now 
that  even  at  the  Council  his  feet  were  already  on  a  crooked 
path.
And  yet  I  am  not  sure:  it  may  have  been  better  so.’ 

‘I  wish  you  would  tell  me  what  happened!’ 

‘All  in  good  time!
‘Guests  unable  to  sleep  in  their 
beds,  and  good  bolsters  ruined  and  all!
He  would  be  a  most  unsafe  guardian;  and 
that  alone  is  answer  enough.’ 

‘But  in  any  case,’  said  Glorfindel,  ‘to  send  the  Ring  to  him 
would  only  postpone  the  day  of  evil.
Nothing  else  was  to  be  seen;  the  dale  all  around  was 
empty.
‘The  Ring-bearer  is  setting  out  on  the  Quest 
of  Mount  Doom.
‘And  other  roads  he  may  find  that  Gondor  does 
not  guard.’ 


348 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Then,’  said  Erestor,  ‘there  are  but  two  courses,  as  Glor- 
hndel  already  has  declared:  to  hide  the  Ring  for  ever;  or  to 
unmake  it.
Have  they  started  yet,  Gandalf?’ 

‘Yes,’  said  the  wizard.
You  cannot  pass.
I  seem  to  see  ahead,  in  a  kind  of  way.
‘You  shall  have  an  hour,  and  you 
shall  be  alone.
‘Put  it  on  again, 
if  you  can  bear  it.
Of  what  tree  growing 
in  the  Elvish  country  they  were  made  not  even  Legolas  knew; 
but  the  wood  was  tough  and  yet  strangely  light.
‘You 
had  better  come  and  live  here,  Frodo  my  lad,’  said  Bilbo 
one  day;  ‘and  then  we  can  celebrate  our  birthday-parties 
comfortably  together.’  At  that  time  Frodo  was  still  in  his 
tweens,  as  the  hobbits  called  the  irresponsible  twenties 
between  childhood  and  coming  of  age  at  thirty-three.
But  when  news  of  the  events  at  Bree  came  to  Tom’s  ears, 
he  sent  them  to  Mr.
The  Dwarves  have  a 
name  which  they  do  not  tell.
Meanwhile  they  had  another  errand:  they  knew  now  that  the 
house  was  empty  and  the  Ring  had  gone.
The  people  in  the  Marish  were  friendly  with  the  Buck- 
landers,  and  the  authority  of  the  Master  of  the  Hall  (as  the 
head  of  the  Brandybuck  family  was  called)  was  still  acknowl¬ 
edged  by  the  farmers  between  Stock  and  Rushey.
With  that  thought,  I  forsook  the  chase,  and  passed  swiftly 
to  Gondor.
The  cow  jumped  over  the  Moon!
Mind  that!
When  they  came  up  with  him,  they  saw  that  he  had  made 
no  mistake:  there  were  clearly  the  beginnings  of  a  path,  that 
climbed  with  many  windings  out  of  the  woods  below  and 
faded  away  on  the  hill-top  behind.
‘  “And  listen,  Gandalf,  my  old  friend  and  helper!”  he  said, 
coming  near  and  speaking  now  in  a  softer  voice.
‘And  now,’  said 
the  wizard,  turning  back  to  Frodo,  ‘the  decision  lies  with  you.
If  you  need  my  advice  any 
longer,  I  should  say  that  your  part  is  ended,  unless  as  a 
recorder.
Then  he  looked  east¬ 
ward  and  saw  all  the  land  of  Lorien  running  down  to  the  pale 
gleam  of  Anduin,  the  Great  River.
Frodo  found  himself  walking  with  Gandalf.
Come  now!
He  was  delighted  to  have 
found  so  polite  a  listener;  for  Frodo  showed  no  sign  of  weari¬ 
ness  and  made  no  attempt  to  change  the  subject,  though 
actually  he  soon  got  rather  lost  among  the  strange  names  of 
people  and  places  that  he  had  never  heard  of  before.
I  wonder  we 
don’t  see  nothing  of  the  Lord  and  Lady  in  all  these  days.
‘It  don’t  seem  to  matter  what  I  think 


114  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

about  them.
Even  the  Tooks  (with 
a  few  exceptions)  thought  Bilbo’s  behaviour  was  absurd.
‘I  think  no  good  of  our  course  from  beginning  to  end, 
as  you  know  well,  Gandalf,’  answered  Aragorn.
Beyond  the  Sim,  beyond  the  Moon,  the  foam  was  on  the  Sea, 

And  by  the  strand  ofllmarin  there  grew  a  golden  Tree.
Pippin  fell  asleep, 
pillowed  on  a  green  hillock.
We  know  the  Ring  is  no 
laughing-matter;  but  we  are  going  to  do  our  best  to  help  you 
against  the  Enemy.’ 

‘The  Ring!’  said  Frodo,  now  completely  amazed.
Bilbo  when  he  came  back,  a  matter 
of  sixty  years  ago,  when  I  was  a  lad.
‘But  we  needed  you.
I  am 
not  the  master  of  the  law,  and  cannot  set  it  aside.
Trolls  were  abroad,  no 
longer  dull-witted,  but  cunning  and  armed  with  dreadful 
weapons.
The  Nine  the  Nazgul  keep.
It  has  great  virtues, 
but  over  such  a  wound  as  this  its  healing  powers  may  be 
small.’ 

He  threw  the  leaves  into  boiling  water  and  bathed  Frodo’s 
shoulder.
But  in  the  meanwhile  we  had  better  go  no  further.
‘Never  before  has  any  voice  dared  to  utter  words  of  that 
tongue  in  Imladris,  Gandalf  the  Grey,’  said  Elrond,  as  the 
shadow  passed  and  the  company  breathed  once  more.
Take  off  the 
Ring!
Don’t  you  go  a-meddling  with 
old  stone  or  cold  Wights  or  prying  in  their  houses,  unless  you 
be  strong  folic  with  hearts  that  never  falter!’  He  said  this  more 
than  once;  and  he  advised  them  to  pass  barrows  by  on  the 
west-side,  if  they  chanced  to  stray  near  one.
‘I  wonder  where  he  is.
When  they  had  eaten  some  food  he 
called  a  council.
For  my  hope  was  founded 


340 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


on  a  fat  man  in  Brce;  and  my  fear  was  founded  on  the 
cunning  of  Sauron.
Or  we  might  pass  by  and  cross 
the  Isen  into  Langstrand  and  Lebennin,  and  so  come  to 
Gondor  from  the  regions  nigh  to  the  sea.’ 

‘Things  have  changed  since  you  came  north,  Boromir,’ 
answered  Gandalf.
For  in  the  day  that  Sauron  first 
put  on  the  One,  Celebrimbor,  maker  of  the  Three,  was  aware 
of  him,  and  from  afar  he  heard  him  speak  these  words,  and 
so  his  evil  purposes  were  revealed.
He  felt  the  certainty 
of  evil  ahead  and  of  evil  following;  but  he  said  nothing.
‘All  ready  to  start?’  he  said  as  Pippin  ran  up.
They  did  not  need  the  guidance  of  their  horses  any 
longer:  you  had  become  visible  to  them,  being  already  on  the 
threshold  of  their  world.
Even  with  such  help  as  Sam  could  give,  it  was 
hard  work  to  pass  across  the  current  at  the  southward  end  of 
the  island  and  drive  the  boat  eastward  towards  the  far  shore.
One  came  wriggling  over 
the  threshold,  glistening  in  the  starlight.
‘Mr.
‘Why  has  nothing  of 
this  been  told  to  me  before?’  he  asked  in  the  elven-tongue.
Go  carefully  with  the  water,  too!
Some  I  cannot  trust,  and  those  I  can 
trust  are  too  dear  to  me:  poor  old  Sam,  and  Merry  and 
Pippin.
This  won’t  do  at  all!’ 


154 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


He  pulled  himself  to  his  feet,  and  staggered  off  to  see  what 
had  become  of  the  ponies.
After  half  an  hour’s  plodding  climb  Strider  reached  the  crown 


244 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


of  the  hill;  Frodo  and  Merry  followed,  tired  and  breathless.
Frodo  sprang  out  of  the  waggon  to  greet  him.
With  another  hop  and  a  bound  there  came 
into  view  a  man,  or  so  it  seemed.
‘But  I  am  going  down  beyond  the  southern  borders  to 
get  some  news,  if  I  can.
He  dared  not  move,  but  lay  as 
he  found  himself:  flat  on  his  back  upon  a  cold  stone  with  his 
hands  on  his  breast.
‘Sleep  in  peace!
Whether  by  some  virtue  in  these  sheaths  or  because  of  the 
spell  that  lay  on  the  mound,  the  blades  seemed  untouched 
by  time,  unrusted,  sharp,  glittering  in  the  sun.
‘Some 
hope  that  the  Three  Rings,  which  Sauron  has  never  touched, 
would  then  become  free,  and  their  rulers  might  heal  the  hurts 
of  the  world  that  he  has  wrought.
‘Surely  the  Ring  was  his 
Precious  and  the  only  thing  he  cared  for?
I  almost  wish  that  my  adventures  were  not  over,  and 
that  I  could  go  with  him  when  his  day  comes.’ 

Aragorn  smiled  at  him;  then  he  turned  to  Boromir  again.
I  wonder 
what  that  forebodes.
Butterbur  with  many  thanks.
And 
that  may  be  an  encouraging  thought.’ 

‘It  is  not,’  said  Frodo.
‘On  the  whole  I  would  rather 
have  our  job  than  Fatty’s  -  waiting  here  till  Black  Riders 
come.’ 

‘You  wait  till  you  are  well  inside  the  Forest,’  said  Fredegar.
"Twas  the  eyes  as  made  me  sit 
up,  so  to  speak.
Together  they  plunged  over  a  fall 
of  green-hued  stone,  and  foamed  down  into  a  dell.
But  it  was  not  the  trolls  that  had  filled  the  Elf  with  terror.
‘Really  old  Butterbur  has  made  a  mess  of 
things!’  he  said.
‘Thror 
gave  it  to  Thrain  his  son,  but  not  Thrain  to  Thorin.
A  Elbereth  Gilthoniel, 
silivren  penna  miriel 
0  menel  aglar  elenath!
That  was  the  origin  of  Buckland,  a 
thickly  inhabited  strip  between  the  river  and  the  Old  Forest,  a 
sort  of  colony  from  the  Shire.
We  have  found  it,  but  it  lies  well  back  from  the  water-side 
here,  and  runs  under  the  lee  of  a  rock-wall,  a  furlong  or  more 
from  the  shore.
What  do  you  think  of  your  course  now,  Aragorn?’ 

Frodo  overheard  these  words,  and  understood  that 
Gandalf  and  Aragorn  were  continuing  some  debate  that  had 
begun  long  before.
Folly!
‘But  so  far  my  only  thought 
has  been  to  get  here;  and  I  hope  I  shan’t  have  to  go  any 
further.
For  a  whole  day  they  took  to  their  paddles  and  hastened 
forward.
‘For  a  nice  bit,  too,’  said  some.
The  drink  in  their  drinking-bowls  seemed  to  be  clear 
cold  water,  yet  it  went  to  their  hearts  like  wine  and  set  free 
their  voices.
‘Don’t  worry  about  that!
‘Pippin!
The  sun  had  risen  and  was  shining 
brightly  when  he  returned  with  more  comforting  news.
‘I  can’t  imagine  a  more  severe  pun¬ 
ishment.
Iarwain  Ben-adar  we  called 
him,  oldest  and  fatherless.
‘It  is  as 
well  you  used  a  stick,  and  not  your  hand,  Strider!’ 

‘Where  did  you  come  by  that,  Sam?’  asked  Pippin.
I 
have  been  walking  wide,  leaping  on  the  hill-tops,  since  the 
grey  dawn  began,  nosing  wind  and  weather,  wet  grass  under¬ 
foot,  wet  sky  above  me.
Beside  it  a  broad  white 
ladder  stood,  and  at  its  foot  three  Elves  were  seated.
Bilbo  Baggins  became  once 
again  the  chief  topic  of  conversation;  and  the  older  folk 
suddenly  found  their  reminiscences  in  welcome  demand.
Even  as  they  did  so,  they  saw  on 
the  top  of  the  hill  something  small  and  dark  against  the  glim¬ 
mer  of  the  moonrise.
He  almost  called  aloud  the  wizard’s  name,  and  then  he  saw 
that  the  figure  was  clothed  not  in  grey  but  in  white,  in  a  white 
that  shone  faintly  in  the  dusk;  and  in  its  hand  there  was  a 
white  staff.
About  that 
stream,  on  this  side  of  the  Great  River,  lies  Rohan.
Far  away  down  in  the  Bay  of  Belfalas,  to 
which  Anduin  runs,  it  is  warm  and  merry,  maybe,  or  would 
be  but  for  the  Enemy.
From  a  locked  drawer,  smelling  of  moth-balls,  he  took 
out  an  old  cloak  and  hood.
‘Here  is  the  Sword  that  was  Broken!’  he  said.
We  must  keep  a 
sharp  watch  and  not  try  to  paddle  swiftly.’ 

To  Sam  in  the  leading  boat  was  given  the  task  of  watch¬ 
man.
We  must  away!
We  have  not  had 
dealings  with  the  Dwarves  since  the  Dark  Days.
Beside 
him  on  the  ground  was  a  drinking-cup  and  some  bread.
‘Then  let  us  start  as  soon  as  it  is  light  tomorrow,  if  we  can,’ 
said  Boromir.
If  I  was  after  the 
Ring,  I  could  have  it  -  now!’ 

He  stood  up,  and  seemed  suddenly  to  grow  taller.
Then 
Tom  and  Goldberry  set  the  table;  and  the  hobbits  sat  half  in 
wonder  and  half  in  laughter:  so  fair  was  the  grace  of  Gold¬ 
berry  and  so  merry  and  odd  the  caperings  of  Tom.
Don’t  get  lost,  and 
don’t  forget  that  it  is  safer  indoors!’ 

The  company  was  in  the  big  common-room  of  the  inn.
‘Mrs.
We  are  high  up  on  the 
east  side  of  Moria.
The  road  wound 
away  before  them  like  a  piece  of  string.
‘Yes,  sir.
Before  you  could  use  that  power  you 
would  need  to  become  far  stronger,  and  to  train  your  will  to 
the  domination  of  others.
But  he  spoke  quite  politely.
Gandalf  stood  at  Frodo’s  side  and  looked  out  under  his 
hand.
‘Poor  old 
Bill!
He  could  see  them  clearly  now:  they  appeared  to 
have  cast  aside  their  hoods  and  black  cloaks,  and  they  were 
robed  in  white  and  grey.
Yet  he  is  great  among  the  Wise.
Namarie!
Only  a 
few  words  of  it  are  now,  as  a  rule,  remembered.
FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD  269 

There  stood  the  trolls:  three  large  trolls.
‘I  hear  nothing 
but  the  night-speech  of  plant  and  stone,’  he  said.
‘And  the  landlord  seems  to  have  heard 
something.
If  I  had 
killed  the  real  Strider,  I  could  kill  you.
‘And  I  wonder  many  other  things.
It  was  green 
and  stagnant,  thrust  out  like  a  slimy  arm  towards  the  enclos¬ 
ing  hills.
Frodo  shivered.
‘No,  and  I  don’t  want  to,’  said  Frodo.
He  seemed  to  think  it  important.
He  found 
himself  wondering  at  times,  especially  in  the  autumn,  about 
the  wild  lands,  and  strange  visions  of  mountains  that  he  had 
never  seen  came  into  his  dreams.
After  a  moment  he  spoke  again 
thickly,  as  if  struggling  with  tears.
Giants  they  seemed  to  him,  vast  grey 
figures  silent  but  threatening.
And  now 
I’m  sorry  to  leave  so  soon.
But  she  chose  mortality,  and  to  die  from  the  world, 
so  that  she  might  follow  him;  and  it  is  sung  that  they  met 
again  beyond  the  Sundering  Seas,  and  after  a  brief  time  walk¬ 
ing  alive  once  more  in  the  green  woods,  together  they  passed, 
long  ago,  beyond  the  confines  of  this  world.
Drogo  was  staying  at  Brandy  Hall  with 
his  father-in-law,  old  Master  Gorbadoc,  as  he  often  did 
after  his  marriage  (him  being  partial  to  his  vittles,  and  old 
Gorbadoc  keeping  a  mighty  generous  table) ;  and  he  went  out 


30 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


boating  on  the  Brandywine  River;  and  he  and  his  wife  were 
drownded,  and  poor  Mr.
‘It  is  as  I  feared,’  said  Gandalf.
I  hope  the 
thinning  process  will  not  go  on  indefinitely,  or  I  shall  become 
a  wraith.’ 

‘Do  not  speak  of  such  things!’  said  Strider  quickly,  and 
with  surprising  earnestness.
Keep  up  your  merry  hearts,  and  ride  to  meet 
your  fortune!’ 

They  begged  him  to  come  at  least  as  far  as  the  inn  and 
drink  once  more  with  them;  but  he  laughed  and  refused, 
saying: 

Tom’s  country  ends  here:  he  will  not  pass  the  borders.
In  that  direction  the  land 
rose  in  wooded  ridges,  green,  yellow,  russet  under  the  sun, 
beyond  which  lay  hidden  the  valley  of  the  Brandywine.
The  Riders  behind  were 
falling  back:  even  their  great  steeds  were  no  match  in  speed 
for  the  white  elf-horse  of  Glorfindel.
But  the  Enemy  was  victorious  and  Barahir  was 
slain,  and  Beren  escaping  through  great  peril  came  over  the 
Mountains  of  Terror  into  the  hidden  Kingdom  of  Thingol  in 
the  forest  of  Neldoreth.
But  you  made  us  lie  down  flat  when  you  saw  them 
down  below;  and  now  you  talk  of  being  seen,  if  we  move.’ 

‘I  was  too  careless  on  the  hill-top,’  answered  Strider.
Time  enough  for  questions  around  the  supper  table.
With  a 
thrust  of  his  huge  hide  shield  he  turned  Boromir’s  sword  and 
bore  him  backwards,  throwing  him  to  the  ground.
Butterbur  sent  me  out 
with  a  lantern.
For  a  little  while  the  travellers  talked  of 
their  night  before  in  the  tree-tops,  and  of  their  day’s  journey, 
and  of  the  Lord  and  Lady;  for  they  had  not  yet  the  heart  to 
look  further  back.
For  that  little  prank - ’ 

‘It  was  sheer  accident!’  interrupted  Frodo.
A  day  or  two  later  a  rumour  (probably  started  by  the 
knowledgeable  Sam)  was  spread  about  that  there  were  going 
to  be  fireworks  -  fireworks,  what  is  more,  such  as  had  not 
been  seen  in  the  Shire  for  nigh  on  a  century,  not  indeed  since 
the  Old  Took  died.
I  am  going  off  at  once: 
so  this  is  good-bye  for  the  present.’  He  got  up.
‘I  will 
go  and  look  on  the  halls  of  Durin,  whatever  may  wait  there 
-  if  you  can  find  the  doors  that  are  shut.’ 

‘Good,  Gimli!’  said  Gandalf.
The  black  waters  roared  and 
echoed,  and  a  wind  screamed  over  them.
Almost  at 
once  he  woke,  and  coughed  and  spluttered.
At  any  rate  he  was  too  large 
and  heavy  for  a  hobbit,  if  not  quite  tall  enough  for  one  of  the 
Big  People,  though  he  made  noise  enough  for  one,  stumping 
along  with  great  yellow  boots  on  his  thick  legs,  and  charging 
through  grass  and  rushes  like  a  cow  going  down  to  drink.
Some  have  been  in  this  world 
longer  than  he.’ 

‘Caradhras  was  called  the  Cruel,  and  had  an  ill  name,’  said 
Gimli,  ‘long  years  ago,  when  rumour  of  Sauron  had  not  been 
heard  in  these  lands.’ 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH  377 

‘It  matters  little  who  is  the  enemy,  if  we  cannot  beat  off  his 
attack,’  said  Gandalf.
At  first  it  seemed  to  the  hobbits  that  although  they  walked 
and  stumbled  until  they  were  weary,  they  were  creeping  for¬ 
ward  like  snails,  and  getting  nowhere.
‘Come  and  have  your  breakfast.
‘I  must  have  nearly  fallen  asleep  on 
guard,’  he  thought.
It  was  about  an  inn;  and  that  is  probably  why  it 
came  into  Frodo’s  mind  just  then.
He  left  a  packet  for  you.
Where  is  he?’ 

Elrond  laughed.
It  ain’t  what  I  call  proper  poetry,  if  you  understand  me: 
just  a  bit  of  nonsense.
Then  shouldering  their 
burdens,  they  set  off,  seeking  a  path  that  would  bring  them 
over  the  grey  hills  of  the  Emyn  Muil,  and  down  into  the  Land 
of  Shadow.
‘Do  you  know,  Sam,’  he  said  at  length,  ‘the  beastly  tree 
threw  me  in!
‘I  wondered  if  you  would  turn  up.’ 

‘I  am  glad  to  find  you  visible,’  replied  the  wizard,  sitting 
down  in  a  chair,  ‘I  wanted  to  catch  you  and  have  a  few 


42 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


final  words.
He  told  them  tales  of  bees  and  flowers, 
the  ways  of  trees,  and  the  strange  creatures  of  the  Forest, 
about  the  evil  things  and  good  things,  things  friendly  and 
things  unfriendly,  cruel  things  and  kind  things,  and  secrets 
hidden  under  brambles.
At  first  it 
was  too  horrible,  and  afterwards  there  were  other  things  to 
think  about.
After  an  hour  he  rose  up  and  came  over  to 
Pippin.
I  hope 
those  wolves  haven’t  got  him  yet.
With  a  suddenness  that  startled  them  all  the  wizard  sprang 
to  his  feet.
Your  Frodo  is  made  of  sterner  stuff  than 
I  had  guessed,  though  Gandalf  hinted  that  it  might  prove  so.
Running 
wilfully  to  death  and  ruining  our  cause.
We  don’t  often  see  Shire-folk  riding  on  the  Road  at  night,’ 
he  went  on,  as  they  halted  a  moment  by  his  door.
But  now  as  he  sat  beside  the  fountain 
in  Lorien  and  heard  about  him  the  voices  of  the  Elves,  his 
thought  took  shape  in  a  song  that  seemed  fair  to  him;  yet 
when  he  tried  to  repeat  it  to  Sam  only  snatches  remained, 
faded  as  a  handful  of  withered  leaves.
In  this  matter  I 
cannot  advise  you.
Yet  not 
in  vain  will  it  prove,  maybe,  that  you  came  to  this  land  seeking 
aid,  as  Gandalf  himself  plainly  purposed.
A  fierce  eager  will  was  there.
In  the  gloom  he 
looked  very  much  like  a  dwarf.
‘Try  now!’ 

Frodo  drew  the  Ring  out  of  his  pocket  again  and  looked  at 
it.
They  passed 
slowly,  and  the  hobbits  could  see  the  starlight  glimmering  on 
their  hair  and  in  their  eyes.
Merry  was  tying  it 


130  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

up,  and  Pippin  was  already  leading  the  pony  up  the  path, 
when  Sam  (who  had  been  looking  back,  as  if  to  take  farewell 
of  the  Shire)  said  in  a  hoarse  whisper: 

‘Look  back,  Mr.
He  had  a  good  deal  to 
think  about.
Stringing  the  bow  and 
fitting  an  arrow  he  turned,  peering  back  over  the  River  into 
the  darkness.
The  figure  lifted  his 
arms  and  a  light  flashed  from  the  staff  that  he  wielded.
I  must  go  off  at  once.
The  next  morning 
dawned  even  brighter  than  before.
‘But  there  is 
no  mistaking  the  place.
He  had  half  expected  to  see  turf  right  up  to  the  walls, 


i68 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


turf  all  pocked  with  hoof-prints.
Why  didn’t  you  go 
too?
Looking  in  a  mirror  he  was  startled  to 
see  a  much  thinner  reflection  of  himself  than  he  remembered: 
it  looked  remarkably  like  the  young  nephew  of  Bilbo  who 
used  to  go  tramping  with  his  uncle  in  the  Shire;  but  the  eyes 
looked  out  at  him  thoughtfully.
There  the  white  rind 
of  the  new  Moon  could  be  seen  glimmering  in  the  remote 
lakes.
We  had  better 
halt  here  for  what  is  left  of  the  night.
I  now  repeat  it  more  correctly:  Thank 
you  very  much  for  coming  to  my  little  party.
But  at  that  moment  there  came  a  sound 
like  mingled  song  and  laughter.
Glorfindel 
shuddered  as  he  took  it,  but  he  looked  intently  at  it.
They 
were  now  going  more  or  less  in  the  right  direction.
‘Now  is  the  time,’  he  said,  ‘when  those  who  wish  to  con¬ 
tinue  the  Quest  must  harden  their  hearts  to  leave  this  land.
‘Why  did 
we  ever  come  into  this  dreadful  Forest?
The  choice  is  yours:  to  go 
or  wait.’ 

‘And  it  is  also  said,’  answered  Frodo:  ‘Go  not  to  the  Elves 
for  counsel,  for  they  will  say  both  no  and  yes.’ 

‘Is  it  indeed?’  laughed  Gildor.
Diving 
under  Aragorn’s  blow  with  the  speed  of  a  striking  snake  he 


424  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

charged  into  the  Company  and  thrust  with  his  spear  straight 
at  Frodo.
It  is  wretched  for  us  all,  but  it  is  no  use  your  trying 


136 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


to  keep  me.
The  old  hole  was  now  being 
cleared  a  little.
It  was  dark  and  damp.
Also  I  think  you  have 


44 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


had  it  quite  long  enough.
Wait  a  few  minutes 
for  me  at  the  bottom,  but  if  I  do  not  come  soon,  go  on!
Merry  and 
Pippin  alone  could  carry  their  boat  with  ease  along  the  flat.
As  he  stepped  out  at  last  upon  the  lofty  platform,  Haldir 
took  his  hand  and  turned  him  towards  the  South.
He  did  not  feel  either 
hungry  or  tired,  only  filled  with  wonder.
A  foot 
above  the  lower  hem  there  was  a  slash.
Except  that  Aragorn  insisted  on  my  putting  in  a  green 
stone.
The  three  hobbit-families  of  Bagshot  Row, 
adjoining  the  field,  were  intensely  interested  and  generally 
envied.
Frodo  went  tramping  over  the  Shire 
with  them;  but  more  often  he  wandered  by  himself,  and  to 
the  amazement  of  sensible  folk  he  was  sometimes  seen  far 
from  home  walking  in  the  hills  and  woods  under  the  starlight.
Even  in  the  daylight  they  would  try  to  keep  them  out,  I  think, 


140  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

at  any  rate  until  they  got  a  message  through  to  the  Master  of 
the  Hall  -  for  they  would  not  like  the  look  of  the  Riders, 
and  would  certainly  be  frightened  by  them.
Hur¬ 
ray!
Chapter  6 


LOTHLORIEN 


‘Alas!
‘These  are  High  Elves!
But  long 
before,  in  the  first  days  of  the  North  Kingdom,  they  built  a 
great  watch-tower  on  Weathertop,  Amon  Sul  they  called  it.
They  had  marched  as  far  as  the  hobbits  could  endure 
without  a  rest,  and  all  were  thinking  of  a  place  where  they 
could  sleep,  when  suddenly  the  walls  to  right  and  left  van¬ 
ished.
He  believed  that 
the  One  had  perished;  that  the  Elves  had  destroyed  it,  as 
should  have  been  done.
Frodo  greeted  him  with  delight.
‘Good  evening,  little  master!’  he  said,  bending  down.
Butterbur, 
tapping  his  forehead.
‘Now  is  the  time  for 
resting.
But  this 
time  they  were  not  so  close,  and  he  could  see  what  was  going 
on:  they  were  not  waving  in  the  wind,  they  were  falling, 
crashing  to  the  ground.
‘There  are 
several  pages  of  the  same  sort,  rather  hastily  written  and 
much  damaged,’  he  said;  ‘but  I  can  make  little  of  them  in  this 
light.
In  any  case,  I  did  not  intend  to  tell  you  all  about 
myself  at  once.
I  still  want  to  know 
a  good  deal,  especially  about  Gandalf.’ 

Galdor  of  the  Havens,  who  sat  nearby,  overheard  him.
This  is  how 
we  cross!
But  Bilbo  did  not  sing 
or  recite.
You  saw 
the  Eye  of  him  that  holds  the  Seven  and  the  Nine.
Folk  are  queer  up  there.’  Sam  stirred  in  his  chair,  and 
looked  at  the  farmer  with  an  unfriendly  eye.
They  had  to  pick  their  way  carefully  to  keep  both  dry-footed 
and  on  their  proper  course.
‘We  have  been  careful  enough  in  the  last  few  days,  and  this 
supper  is  no  feast;  but  we  have  used  more  than  we  ought,  if 
we  have  two  weeks  still  to  go,  and  perhaps  more.’ 

‘There  is  food  in  the  wild,’  said  Strider;  ‘berry,  root,  and 
herb;  and  I  have  some  skill  as  a  hunter  at  need.
In  spite  of  his  delight  in  Bilbo’s  company 
Frodo  felt  a  tug  of  regret  as  they  passed  out  of  the  Hall  of 
Fire.
‘You  may  hear  something 
to  your  advantage.’ 

‘Very  well,’  said  Frodo,  trying  to  appear  unconcerned.
A  black  cloud  lies 
often  over  it  of  late.
I  know.
‘Flere  dwell  Celeborn  and  Galadriel,’  said  Flaldir.
‘Turn!
The  hobbits  wrapped  themselves  up,  but  their  ears  were 
strained  for  any  sound  above  the  creak  of  the  wheels  and  the 
slow  clop  of  the  ponies’  hoofs.
‘Come!
‘But  bless  you!’  he  laughed,  getting  up  and  waving 
his  arms,  ‘I  give  in.
He  could 
not  catch  what  was  said.
But  you  do  not  stand  alone.
‘We’ll  clear  up  later,’  said  Merry.
For  few,  I  deem,  know  of  our  deeds,  and  therefore 
guess  little  at  their  peril,  if  we  should  fail  at  last.
I  seemed  to  be  drawn  somehow.
They  stood  for  a  while  facing  one 
another,  and  the  air  of  the  room  tingled.
‘Nor  do  I  see  the 
need  to  go  there.
We  will  bear  the  little 
folk.
‘The  Men  of  the  West  did  not 
live  here;  though  in  their  latter  days  they  defended  the  hills 
for  a  while  against  the  evil  that  came  out  of  Angmar.
Thrice  worthy  and  beloved  Barliman!”  said  I.
I  must  hold  the  narrow 
way.
September  was  passing  and  there  was 
still  no  news  of  him.
‘Behold  the  Argonath,  the  Pillars  of  the  Kings!’  cried 
Aragorn.
Coming!’  called  Sam,  and  flung  him¬ 
self  from  the  bank,  clutching  at  the  departing  boat.
Are  you  going 
any  further?’ 

‘Yes,  I  am.
He  had  been  saying 
farewell  to  the  beer-barrel  in  the  cellar.
We  don’t  see  many  of  the  Big  Folic  over  the  border; 
and  anyway  I  had  never  heard  of  any  like  this  black  fellow.
Kings  of  little  kingdoms 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  171 

fought  together,  and  the  young  Sun  shone  like  fire  on  the  red 
metal  of  their  new  and  greedy  swords.
Fair  was 
she  who  long  ago  wore  this  on  her  shoulder.
Legolas  was  away  much  among  the 
Galadhrim,  and  after  the  first  night  he  did  not  sleep  with 
the  other  companions,  though  he  returned  to  eat  and  talk 
with  them.
the  wounds  of  this  weapon  are  beyond  my 
skill  to  heal.
Why  were 
you  delayed?
Beyond  it 
was  a  deep  fosse  lost  in  soft  shadow,  but  the  grass  upon  its 
brink  was  green,  as  if  it  glowed  still  in  memory  of  the  sun 
that  had  gone.
‘It’s  going  to  be  thick,’  said  Maggot;  ‘but  I’ll  not  light  my 
lanterns  till  I  turn  for  home.
Gollum,  maybe?’ 

‘Yes,  that  is  what  I  have  feared  for  some  time,’  said  Frodo.
At  length  they  came  to  land  again  upon  the  southern  slopes 
of  Amon  Lhaw.
We  must  leave 
as  soon  as  you  can  get  ready.’ 

‘I  will  add  a  word  of  advice,  if  I  may,’  said  Boromir.
‘We  must  be 
getting  off  at  once.
Unless  I  am  quite  astray,  I  guess  that  we  are 
above  and  to  the  north  of  the  Great  Gates;  and  it  may  not  be 
easy  to  find  the  right  road  down  to  them.
Annon  edhellen,  edro  hi  ammen!
With  most 
hobbits  it  is  a  supper-song  or  a  bed-song;  but  these  hobbits 
hummed  a  walking-song  (though  not,  of  course,  without  any 
mention  of  supper  and  bed).
It  was  Frodo  who  first  put  something  of  his  sorrow  into 
halting  words.
For  he  gave  it  up  in  the 
end  of  his  own  accord:  an  important  point.
‘But  the  mountains  are  ahead  of  us,’  said  Pippin.
Rumours  of  strange  events  had  by 
now  spread  all  over  the  field,  but  Frodo  would  only  say  no 
doubt  everything  will  be  cleared  up  in  the  morning.
They  were 
stumbling  along  dizzy  with  weariness,  and  unable  to  think  of 
anything  but  their  feet  and  legs.
‘That  Gandalf  should  be  late,  does  not  bode 
well.
‘It’s  delightful!’  he  said  with  an  effort.
‘Off  early?
‘As  a 
matter  of  fact  I  heard  him  talking  to  a  stranger,  who  seemed 
to  be  inquiring  for  me,  and  I  nearly  went  and  asked  him  who 


IOO 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


it  was.
Frodo  found  that  Strider  was  now  looking  at  him,  as  if  he 
had  heard  or  guessed  all  that  had  been  said.
‘The  day  has  come  at  last,’  he  said:  ‘the  day  of 
choice  which  we  have  long  delayed.
Not  that 
most  of  the  Company  were  eager  to  hurry  southwards:  they 
were  content  that  the  decision,  which  they  must  make  at  latest 
when  they  came  to  Rauros  and  the  Tindrock  Isle,  still  lay 
some  days  ahead;  and  they  let  the  River  bear  them  on  at  its 
own  pace,  having  no  desire  to  hasten  towards  the  perils  that 
lay  beyond,  whichever  course  they  took  in  the  end.
Bombur  was  now  so  fat  that  he 
could  not  move  himself  from  his  couch  to  his  chair  at  table, 
and  it  took  six  young  dwarves  to  lift  him.
Then  it 
seemed  to  Frodo  that  she  lifted  her  arms  in  a  final  farewell, 
and  far  but  piercing-clear  on  the  following  wind  came  the 
sound  of  her  voice  singing.
I  think  it  likely 
that  some  would  resist  the  Rings  far  longer  than  most  of 
the  Wise  would  believe.
‘It  would  be  a  great  comfort  to 
know  that  he  was  on  the  way,  in  front  of  us  or  behind  us.’ 

‘Perhaps,’  said  Strider.
His 
eyes  were  shining  and  his  face  eager.
Suddenly  he  awoke  from  his  thoughts:  a  strange  feeling 
came  to  him  that  something  was  behind  him,  that  unfriendly 
eyes  were  upon  him.
Pass  them  by!
‘Now  I  understand.’  He 
faltered  and  leaned  heavily  on  his  staff.
Wanderers  in  the  shadowed  land 
despair  not!
I  don’t  suppose  they  are  far  away.
To  his  alarm  Frodo  became  aware  that  the  ridiculous 


206 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


young  Took,  encouraged  by  his  success  with  the  fat  Mayor  of 
Michel  Delving,  was  now  actually  giving  a  comic  account  of 
Bilbo’s  farewell  party.
‘Celebrant  is  already  a  strong  stream  here,  as  you  see,’  said 
Haldir,  ‘and  it  runs  both  swift  and  deep,  and  is  very  cold.
Yet 
so  little  faith  and  trust  do  we  find  now  in  the  world  beyond 
Lothlorien,  unless  maybe  in  Rivendell,  that  we  dare  not  by 
our  own  trust  endanger  our  land.
He 
stared  down  at  the  hateful  Road,  leading  back  westward  -  to 
his  home.
Doom ,  doom  went  the  drums  in  the  deep.
But  there  are 
some  of  us  still  who  go  abroad  for  the  gathering  of  news  and 
the  watching  of  our  enemies,  and  they  speak  the  languages 
of  other  lands.
Do  you  miss  the  East  Wind?’ 

‘No  indeed,’  he  answered.
A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY  49 

For  MILO  BURROWS,  hoping  it  will  be  useful,  from  B.B.; 
on  a  gold  pen  and  ink-bottle.
Bilbo  had  not  much  to  say  of  himself.
But  all’s  well  as  ends  well;  though  perhaps  we  should 
not  say  that  until  we  reach  our  own  doors.
‘Where’s  Bob?’  asked  the  landlord.
Yet  oft 
in  lies  truth  is  hidden:  in  the  Sea  it  would  be  safe.’ 

‘Not  safe  for  ever,’  said  Gandalf.
The  wind  whistled  and 
the  snow  became  a  blinding  blizzard.
He 
vanished  and  passed  down  the  hill,  less  than  a  rustle  of  the 
wind.
I  think  not.
But 
Frodo  quickly  drew  back  the  Ring.
‘Well,  here  we  are  and  all  ready,’  said  Merry;  ‘but  where 
are  the  Doors?
The  Man 
gasped,  stared  for  a  moment  amazed,  and  then  ran  wildly 
about,  seeking  here  and  there  among  the  rocks  and  trees.
We  will  fasten 
them  above  the  other,  one  shoulder-high,  and  another  half- 
high,  and  holding  these  the  strangers  should  be  able  to  cross 
with  care.’ 

When  this  slender  bridge  had  been  made,  the  Company 
passed  over,  some  cautiously  and  slowly,  others  more  easily.
Bob 
came  back  with  the  report  that  no  horse  or  pony  was  to  be 
got  for  love  or  money  in  the  neighbourhood  -  except  one: 
Bill  Ferny  had  one  that  he  might  possibly  sell.
‘All  I  needed  was  some  food  and  a  little  rest.’ 

‘No!’  said  Aragorn.
I  wonder  what  has  become  of  it?
Tinuviel  rescued  Beren  from  the  dungeons  of 
Sauron,  and  together  they  passed  through  great  dangers,  and 
cast  down  even  the  Great  Enemy  from  his  throne,  and  took 
from  his  iron  crown  one  of  the  three  Silmarils,  brightest  of 
all  jewels,  to  be  the  bride-price  of  Luthien  to  Thingol  her 
father.
Sometimes  Frodo  was  with  them;  but 
he  was  content  to  lean  on  their  guidance,  and  he  spent  as 
much  time  as  he  could  with  Bilbo.
Gardeners  came  by  arrangement,  and  removed  in  wheel¬ 
barrows  those  that  had  inadvertently  remained  behind.
It  was 
answered;  and  to  the  dismay  of  Frodo  and  his  friends  out 
from  the  trees  and  rocks  away  on  the  left  four  other  Riders 
came  flying.
He  did  not  like  the  looks  of  the  men  that  had  gone 
out.
And  as  for  Frodo,  he  would  not  speak,  though  Boromir 
pressed  him  with  questions.
Then  Sauron 
was  vanquished  and  his  spirit  fled  and  was  hidden  for  long 
years,  until  his  shadow  took  shape  again  in  Mirkwood.
It  was  high  and  flat-topped, 


416  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

and  the  stone  door  was  still  upon  its  hinges,  standing  half 
open.
foes!
Underhill.
I  will  give  you  a  travelling  name  now.
‘Ores!’  said  Frodo.
What  of  the  Three 
Rings  of  the  Elves?
As  the  sun  rose  and  passed  noon  they 
glimpsed  far  off  in  the  east  the  grey-green  lines  of  the  Downs 
that  lay  beyond  the  Old  Forest  on  that  side.
‘Not  now!
A  long  and  wearisome  journey.
But  if  you 
want  to  be  introduced  to  our  chief  investigator,  I  can  produce 
him.’ 

‘Where  is  he?’  said  Frodo,  looking  round,  as  if  he  expected 
a  masked  and  sinister  figure  to  come  out  of  a  cupboard.
I  saw  Mr.
For 
so  they  loved  to  call  him.
‘I  can  foresee  very  little  of  your  road;  and  how 
your  task  is  to  be  achieved  I  do  not  know.
Alas  for 
Lothlorien  that  I  love!
The  guests  became  suddenly  aware  that  they 
were  singing  merrily,  as  if  it  was  easier  and  more  natural  than 
talking.
Frodo  turned 
and  saw  Strider,  and  yet  not  Strider;  for  the  weatherworn 
Ranger  was  no  longer  there.
He  looked  long  at  it,  as  if  stirred  by  some  memory,  shaking 
his  head,  and  saying  at  last: 

‘Here  is  a  pretty  toy  for  Tom  and  for  his  lady!
I  am  going  to  start,  and  Gandalf  must  follow  me.’  He 
turned  to  go  back,  and  then  stopped,  for  he  heard  voices,  just 
round  the  corner  by  the  end  of  Bagshot  Row.
At  the  top,  as  high  as  Gandalf  could  reach,  was  an  arch  of 
interlacing  letters  in  an  Elvish  character.
At  first  they  could  see 


LOTHLORIEN 


435 


nothing.
He 
thought  he  had  come  to  the  end  of  his  adventure,  and  a 
terrible  end,  but  the  thought  hardened  him.
Now  what  may  you  be  doing?’ 

‘Lor  bless  you,  Mr.
I  have  been  watching  the  East  Road 
anxiously.’ 

‘Do  you  think  the  Black  Riders  have  anything  to  do  with 
it  -  with  Gandalf ’s  absence,  I  mean?’  asked  Frodo.
Of  old  Fangorn  lay  upon  the  borders  of 
our  realm;  but  it  is  now  many  lives  of  men  since  any  of  us 
visited  it,  to  prove  or  disprove  the  legends  that  have  come 
down  from  distant  years.
They  were  too  overjoyed  to  hear  him  speak  to  answer  for 
a  while;  nor  did  they  understand  his  question.
‘Open,  in  the  name  of  Mordor!’  said  a  voice  thin  and 
menacing.
If  the  Riders  fail  to  find  us  in 
the  wilderness,  they  are  likely  to  make  for  Weathertop  them¬ 
selves.
In  that  land  he  would  learn  much,  too 
much  for  his  comfort.
Until  that  night  when  he  left  this  house.
At  least  he  was  not,  as  were  most  of  the  others,  troubled  by 
the  mere  darkness  in  itself.
Come  back 
to  this  spot,  if  you  find  him,  or  any  traces  of  him.
Here  and  there  upon  heights  and 
ridges  they  caught  glimpses  of  ancient  walls  of  stone,  and 
the  ruins  of  towers:  they  had  an  ominous  look.
Whether  the  morning  and  evening  of  one  day  or  of  many 
days  had  passed  Frodo  could  not  tell.
Let  us  sing  together 

Of  sun,  stars,  moon  and  mist,  rain  and  cloudy  weather, 

Light  on  the  budding  leaf,  dew  on  the  feather, 

Wind  on  the  open  hill,  bells  on  the  heather, 

Reeds  by  the  shady  pool,  lilies  on  the  water: 

Old  Tom  Bombadil  and  the  River-daughter!
But  if  there  are  mallorn-trees  beyond  the 
Great  Sea,  none  have  reported  it.’ 

As  they  spoke  thus,  the  Company  filed  slowly  along  the 
paths  in  the  wood,  led  by  Haldir,  while  the  other  Elf  walked 
behind.
The  old 
man  seemed  put  out.
Nob!’  he  shouted.
They  all  feared  that  a  song  or  some  poetry  was  now  immi¬ 
nent;  and  they  were  getting  bored.
Here  Strider  turned  aside,  and  soon  they 
were  lost  in  a  sombre  country  of  dark  trees  winding  among 
the  feet  of  sullen  hills.
They  looked  up  at  the  grey  and  yellow  leaves, 
moving  softly  against  the  light,  and  singing.
‘It  was  only 
a  dream,’  said  Frodo,  ‘but  it  suddenly  came  back  to  me.
I  have 
avoided  his  farm  for  years  and  years.
Long  have  its  vast  mansions  lain  empty  since  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  Durin  fled.
Before  long  the  invitations  began  pouring  out,  and  the 


34 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Hobbiton  post-office  was  blocked,  and  the  Bywater  post- 
office  was  snowed  under,  and  voluntary  assistant  postmen 
were  called  for.
There  it  left  the  trees  and  faded  into  the  turf.
When  all  the  Company  had  crossed,  they  sat  and  rested 
and  ate  a  little  food;  and  Legolas  told  them  tales  of  Lothlorien 
that  the  Elves  of  Mirkwood  still  kept  in  their  hearts,  of  sun¬ 
light  and  starlight  upon  the  meadows  by  the  Great  River 
before  the  world  was  grey.
Always  a  bit  more  to  discover,  and 
no  knowing  what  you’ll  find  round  a  corner.
You  must  now  make  haste,  and  neither  stay  nor  turn  back; 
for  the  Shire  is  no  longer  any  protection  to  you.’ 

‘I  cannot  imagine  what  information  could  be  more  terrify¬ 
ing  than  your  hints  and  warnings,’  exclaimed  Frodo.
I  was  looking  forward  to  your  help.’ 

‘I  did  mean  to  -  but  I  have  had  to  change  my  mind.
So  the  days  slipped  away,  as  each  morning  dawned  bright 
and  fair,  and  each  evening  followed  cool  and  clear.
Before  the  travellers  lay  a  wide 
ravine,  with  great  rocky  sides  to  which  clung,  upon  shelves 
and  in  narrow  crevices,  a  few  thrawn  trees.
The  only  road  of  old  to  Moria  from 
the  west  had  lain  along  the  course  of  a  stream,  the  Shannon, 
that  ran  out  from  the  feet  of  the  cliffs  near  where  the  doors 
had  stood.
Surely  the  time  is  up?’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Aragorn.
He  wrote  what  I  have  just  said.’ 

‘He  did  not  make  it  up,’  said  Strider.
The  door  was  open  and  light  streamed  out  of  it.
Then  for  the  last  time  he  looked  up  and  shook  his  fist 
at  her.
It  is  icy  cold.’ 

‘Soon  it  becomes  a  swift  river,  and  it  gathers  water  from 
many  other  mountain-streams,’  said  Aragorn.
“For 
aid?
But  in  the  meanwhile  it  seems  that 


82 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


I  am  a  danger,  a  danger  to  all  that  live  near  me.
‘So  it  was  that  when  summer  waned,  there  came  a  night 
of  moon,  and  Gwaihir  the  Windlord,  swiftest  of  the  Great 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


341 


Eagles,  came  unlooked-for  to  Orthanc;  and  he  found  me 
standing  on  the  pinnacle.
Butterbur  went  out,  with  another  doubt¬ 
ful  look  at  Strider  and  a  shake  of  his  head.
I  must  be  the  only  one  in  the  Shire, 
besides  you  Frodo,  that  has  ever  seen  the  old  fellow’s  secret 
book.’ 

‘You  have  read  his  book!’  cried  Frodo.
‘I  knew 
these  horsemen  were  pursuing  me;  but  now  at  any  rate  they 
seem  to  have  missed  me  and  to  have  gone  away.’ 

‘You  must  not  count  on  that!’  said  Strider  sharply.
Tom  called  them  one  by  one  and  they  climbed 
over  the  brow  and  stood  in  a  line.
At  last  they  came  suddenly 
into  a  thin  shade;  great  grey  branches  reached  across  the 
path.
Their  cold  eyes  glittered, 
and  they  called  to  him  with  fell  voices.
In  their  dark  cloaks 
they  were  as  invisible  as  if  they  all  had  magic  rings.
They  sounded 
disquietingly  like  signals  of  some  sort;  but  after  a  while  the 
knocking  died  away  and  was  not  heard  again.
‘I  hate  this 
place,  too,  and  I  am  afraid.
It  has  been  treasured  by  his  heirs 
when  all  other  heirlooms  were  lost;  for  it  was  spoken  of  old 
among  us  that  it  should  be  made  again  when  the  Ring, 
Isildur’s  Bane,  was  found.
‘That 
was  a  mighty  shot  in  the  dark,  my  friend!’ 

‘But  who  can  say  what  it  hit?’  said  Legolas.
Boats  may  make  your  journey  less  toilsome  for  a  while.
But  I  warrant  you  haven’t  seen  them  doing  it;  nor  anyone 
else  in  the  Shire.’ 

‘Well,  I  don’t  know,’  said  Sam  thoughtfully.
Also  my  good  Sackville-Bagginses 
that  I  welcome  back  at  last  to  Bag  End.
Will  you  not  at  least  let  me  make  trial  of  my  plan?
Frodo  looked  behind.
These  doors  have  no  key.
Butterbur,  snapping  his  fingers.
FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


279 


Frodo  looked  back  for  a  moment  over  his  shoulder.
Otho 
and  his  wife  Lobelia  were  present.
‘I  will  do  now  what  I  must,’  he  said.
‘You  soon 
broke  down.
But  only  a  few  trials,  I  think,  will  be  needed;  and  I  shall  not 
have  to  call  on  Gimli  for  words  of  the  secret  dwarf-tongue 
that  they  teach  to  none.
Before  them 
the  mountains  frowned,  but  their  path  lay  in  a  deep  trough 
of  land  and  they  could  see  only  the  higher  shoulders  and  the 
far  eastward  peaks.
They  lit  a  small  fire 
down  under  the  gnarled  roots  of  an  old  pine,  that  hung  over 
a  shallow  pit:  it  looked  as  if  stone  had  once  been  quarried 
there.
‘There  used  to  be  great  windows  on  the  mountain¬ 
side,  and  shafts  leading  out  to  the  light  in  the  upper  reaches 
of  the  Mines.
‘Who  lives  in  this  land?’  he  asked.
Health  and  hope  grew  strong  in  them,  and  they  were 
content  with  each  good  day  as  it  came,  taking  pleasure  in 
every  meal,  and  in  every  word  and  song.
We  could  save  a  quarter  of  the 
distance  if  we  made  a  line  for  the  Ferry  from  where  we  stand.’ 

‘ Short  cuts  make  long  delays ,’  argued  Pippin.
For  the  Lord  of  the 
Galadhrim  is  accounted  the  wisest  of  the  Elves  of  Middle- 
earth,  and  a  giver  of  gifts  beyond  the  power  of  kings.
But  the  Ring  must  not  come  near  Isengard,  if  that 
can  by  any  means  be  prevented.
Nine  he  gave  to  Mortal 
Men,  proud  and  great,  and  so  ensnared  them.
There  was  a  noise  like  a 
strong  wind  blowing,  and  on  it  was  borne  the  sound  of  hoofs, 
galloping,  galloping,  galloping  from  the  East.
When  he  took  it  out  he  had  intended  to 
fling  it  from  him  into  the  very  hottest  part  of  the  fire.
That’s  hard,  cruel  hard.’ 

Sam  passed  his  hand  over  his  eyes,  brushing  away  the 
tears.
What  does  he  want  for  it?’ 

Bill  Ferny’s  price  was  twelve  silver  pennies;  and  that  was 
indeed  at  least  three  times  the  pony’s  value  in  those  parts.
Pippin  went  out  for  a  last  stroll  in  the  garden.
It  is  perilous 
to  study  too  deeply  the  arts  of  the  Enemy,  for  good  or  for  ill.
I  didn’t  know  that  any  of  the  Big 
People  were  like  that.
But  if  you  take  my  advice  you  will  use  it  very 
seldom,  or  not  at  all.
There  the  others  must  take  refuge.
There  Beren  came  from  mountains  cold, 

And  lost  he  wandered  under  leaves, 

And  where  the  Elven-river  rolled 
He  walked  alone  and  sorrowing.
In  his  hands  he  carried 
on  a  large  leaf  as  on  a  tray  a  small  pile  of  white  water-lilies.
‘That  is  the  way  for  us,’  said  Frodo.
Boromir’s  eyes  glinted  as  he  gazed  at  the  golden  thing.
At  that  moment  Gandalf  lifted  his  staff,  and  crying  aloud 
he  smote  the  bridge  before  him.
And  you  will  find  them 
a  great  aid  in  keeping  out  of  the  sight  of  unfriendly  eyes, 
whether  you  walk  among  the  stones  or  the  trees.
Then  Balin  is  now  lord  ofMoria.
Strider  sprang  from  hiding  and  dashed  down  towards  the 
Road,  leaping  with  a  cry  through  the  heather;  but  even  before 
he  had  moved  or  called,  the  rider  had  reined  in  his  horse  and 
halted,  looking  up  towards  the  thicket  where  they  stood.
Frodo  was  selling  Bag  End,  indeed 
he  had  already  sold  it  -  to  the  Sackville-Bagginses!
It  bent  somewhat 
towards  the  west  so  that  at  first  all  was  dark  ahead;  but  soon 
Frodo  saw  a  tall  gap  of  light  before  him,  ever  growing.
Barley,  he  says,  I’m  off 
in  the  morning.
‘Don’t  let  us  lose 
one  another,  or  forget  which  way  the  Hedge  lies!’ 

They  picked  a  way  among  the  trees,  and  their  ponies 
plodded  along,  carefully  avoiding  the  many  writhing  and 
interlacing  roots.
Snatches  of  competing  songs  came  from 
the  bathroom  mixed  with  the  sound  of  splashing  and  wallow¬ 
ing.
good  luck!’  cried  Bilbo,  stuttering  with  the  cold.
Have  you  others  to 
offer?” 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


339 


‘He  was  cold  now  and  perilous.
The  ripples  on  the 
water  grew  and  came  closer;  some  were  already  lapping  on 
the  shore.
If  any  of  the  Wise 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


349 


should  with  this  Ring  overthrow  the  Lord  of  Mordor,  using 
his  own  arts,  he  would  then  set  himself  on  Sauron’s  throne, 
and  yet  another  Dark  Lord  would  appear.
‘His  wound  was  small, 
and  it  is  already  closed.
But  as  far  as  I  know  Bilbo  alone  in  history  has  ever  gone 
beyond  playing,  and  really  done  it.
And  I  don’t  see  what  it  matters  to  me  or  you.
We  shall  have  to  try  going  faster  tomorrow.
Fool!
Indeed,  in  one  corner  some  of 
the  young  Tooks  and  Brandybucks,  supposing  Uncle  Bilbo 
to  have  finished  (since  he  had  plainly  said  all  that  was  neces¬ 
sary),  now  got  up  an  impromptu  orchestra,  and  began  a 
merry  dance-tune.
If  he  recovers  it,  then  he  will  command  them  all 
again,  wherever  they  be,  even  the  Three,  and  all  that  has 
been  wrought  with  them  will  be  laid  bare,  and  he  will  be 
stronger  than  ever.
It’s  wonderfully  quiet  here.
Do  not  count  on  anything  yet.
I  have  never 
seen  such  a  thing  happen  before,  though  I  have  heard  of  it 
in  tales.
‘Give  me  leave,  Master  Elrond,’  said  he,  ‘first 
to  say  more  of  Gondor,  for  verily  from  the  land  of  Gondor  I 
am  come.
Then  he  put  on  quickly  some  old  untidy  garments, 
and  fastened  round  his  waist  a  worn  leather  belt.
And  I  believe  them  too,  whatever  Ted  may  say.
In  no  region  had  the  messengers  discovered  any  signs  or 
tidings  of  the  Riders  or  other  servants  of  the  Enemy.
‘Good  heavens 
above!
The  stream  was  there  no  more  than 
a  winding  black  ribbon,  bordered  with  leaning  alder-trees.
I 
do  not  wish  to  enter  Moria  a  second  time.’ 

‘And  I  don’t  wish  to  enter  it  even  once,’  said  Pippin.
When  we  leave  here,  where  there  are  still  a  few  trees  and 
bushes,  each  of  us  should  carry  a  faggot  of  wood,  as  large  as 
he  can  bear.’ 

‘And  Bill  could  take  a  bit  more,  couldn’t  you,  lad?’  said 
Sam.
It  shaped  itself  like  a  mountain 
seen  in  the  distance,  and  began  to  glow  at  the  summit.
‘No!’  said  the  wizard.
‘The  Brandybucks  go  in  - 
occasionally  when  the  fit  takes  them.
1462 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY  209 

Now  quicker  the  fiddle  went  deedle-dum-diddle; 
the  dog  began  to  roar, 

The  cow  and  the  horses  stood  on  their  heads; 

The  guests  all  bounded  from  their  beds 
and  danced  upon  the  floor.
He  had 
sat  and  watched  all  alone  for  about  six  hours,  and  had  let  the 
others  rest.
‘And  there  are  some  folk  in  Bree  who 
are  not  to  be  trusted,’  he  went  on.
I  have 
seen  them!
I  do  not  understand  it.’ 

Gandalf  looked  up  with  sudden  interest.
‘Aye,  we  will,’  said  Gimli.
Though  I  said  “absurd”  just 
now,  I  did  not  mean  it.
Down  west  sinks  the  Sun:  soon  you  will  be  groping.
To  the  east  the  outflung  arm  of  the  mountains  marched  to 
a  sudden  end,  and  far  lands  could  be  descried  beyond  them, 
wide  and  vague.
Frodo  was  delighted  (in 
a  way):  it  was  his  own  ring  all  right,  for  Merry  was  staring 
blankly  at  his  chair,  and  obviously  could  not  see  him.
“My  news  is  evil.” 
Then  he  looked  about  him,  as  if  the  hedges  might  have  ears.
At  that  moment  there  came  a  roaring  and  a  rushing:  a  noise 
of  loud  waters  rolling  many  stones.
I  will  come  back  with  gold.” 

‘“No  you  won’t,”  I  said.
Three  of  the  black  horses  had  been 
found  at  once  drowned  in  the  flooded  Ford.
‘She  held  you  long  in  her  gaze, 
Ring-bearer,’  he  said.
But  to  the 
wizard’s  eye  there  was  a  faint  change,  just  a  hint  as  it  were  of 
transparency,  about  him,  and  especially  about  the  left  hand 
that  lay  outside  upon  the  coverlet.
The  sun,  already  long  fallen  from  the  noon,  was  shining  in 
a  windy  sky.
‘Rope!’  muttered  Sam.
The 
Balrog  fell  back,  and  its  sword  flew  up  in  molten  fragments.
‘When  the  Ringwraiths  swept  by,  your  friends  ran  up 
behind.
It  was  not  Gollum,  Frodo,  but  the  Ring  itself  that 
decided  things.
The 
startled  hobbits  peered  out  of  lamplit  doors  to  gape  at  it.
It  does  not.
Ores  were  as  keen  as  hounds 
on  a  scent,  it  was  said,  but  they  could  also  climb.
They  could  only  pass  across  it  in 
single  file.
488 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Now  it  is  time  to  drink  the  cup  of  farewell,’  she  said.
‘Drink,  Lord  of  the  Galadhrim!
‘I  fear  their  end  was  cruel.
Suddenly  Boromir  came  and  sat  beside  him.
Let  them  sail!
‘A  corslet 
of  Moria-silver?
And  look  at  the  outlandish  folk 
that  visit  him:  dwarves  coming  at  night,  and  that  old  wandering 
conjuror,  Gandalf,  and  all.
‘These  trees  do  shift.
I  was  only  fifty -one  then,  and  birthdays  did  not 
seem  so  important.
Then 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


343 


I  rode  on  in  fear.
The  land  and  the 
weather  will  be  milder  now,  but  perhaps  all  the  more 
dangerous.’ 

‘Dangerous  or  not,  a  real  sunrise  is  mighty  welcome,’  said 
Frodo,  throwing  back  his  hood  and  letting  the  morning  light 
fall  on  his  face.
Soon  Frodo  felt  the  pain  leave 
him,  and  his  breath  grew  easy:  though  he  was  stiff  and  sore 
to  the  touch  for  many  days.
Come 
on  now!
‘Piles  of  jewels?’  said  Gandalf.
It  was  close  on  midnight, 
and  they  had  been  drifting  for  some  while,  hardly  using  the 
paddles,  when  suddenly  Sam  cried  out.
‘Now  where’s  he  got  to?’  cried  Sam,  looking  worried.
Turning  back,  when  they  reached  the  bottom  of  the  green 
hollow,  they  saw  Goldberry,  now  small  and  slender  like  a 
sunlit  flower  against  the  sky:  she  was  standing  still  watching 
them,  and  her  hands  were  stretched  out  towards  them.
As  they  went  forward  the  hills 
about  them  steadily  rose.
They  are  sure  to 
have  found  out  which  those  are.
Well, 
friends,  I’m  off  home.
Peering  out  from 
the  edge  of  the  dell  they  could  see  nothing  but  a  grey  land 
now  vanishing  quickly  into  shadow.
‘Do  you  really  mean 
to  start  before  the  break  of  day?’ 

‘I  don’t  know,’  answered  Frodo.
‘And  my  will  and  all  the  other 
documents  too.
For  it  seems  to  me  that 
you  have  set  out  only  just  in  time,  if  indeed  you  are  in  time.
Turn  if  you  can!’  He 
drove  his  paddle  into  the  water,  trying  to  hold  the  boat  and 
bring  it  round.
It’s 
like  being  at  home  and  on  a  holiday  at  the  same  time,  if  you 
understand  me.
They  started  again  before  the  day  was  broad.
‘There’s 
Mr.
‘And  there  is  the  Tree  of  the  High  Elves!’  said  Legolas.
It  seemed  to  him 
that  he  had  stepped  through  a  high  window  that  looked  on  a 
vanished  world.
‘What  am  I  saying?
‘I  have  looked  the  last  upon  that  which  was  fairest,’  he  said 
to  Legolas  his  companion.
Green  walls  and  white  walls  rose.
‘The  Council  laid  it  upon  me  to 
bear  it.’ 

‘It  is  by  our  own  folly  that  the  Enemy  will  defeat  us,’  cried 
Boromir.
Others  shall  speak  of  its  finding,  for 
in  that  I  played  small  part.’ 

He  ceased,  but  at  once  Boromir  stood  up,  tall  and  proud, 
before  them.
He  then  closed  and  barred  the  heavy  inside  shutters  and  drew 
the  curtains  together.
‘You  did  not 
wish  to  go  home  without  your  master  before  you  looked  in 
the  Mirror,  and  yet  you  knew  that  evil  things  might  well  be 
happening  in  the  Shire.
And  care  is  needed!’  He  leaned 
forward  and  looked  at  them.
What  do  you  think  that  funny 
customer  asked  me?’ 

They  waited  anxiously  for  him  to  go  on.
But  I  meant 
no  wrong  to  you,  Mr.
‘Look!’  he  said.
‘If  you  have  not  heard,  I  think  we  will 
not  speak  yet  of  that  either.
‘I  know  these  fields  and  this  gate!’  he  said.
The  flies  had  stopped  buzzing.
I 
must  be  trotting.
‘If 
there  are  any  watchers  that  can  endure  this  storm,  then  they 
can  see  us,  fire  or  no.’ 

But  though  they  had  brought  wood  and  kindlings  by  the 
advice  of  Boromir,  it  passed  the  skill  of  Elf  or  even  Dwarf  to 
strike  a  flame  that  would  hold  amid  the  swirling  wind  or  catch 
in  the  wet  fuel.
He  has  strange  powers  and  many  allies.’ 


376 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘His  arm  has  grown  long  indeed,’  said  Gimli,  ‘if  he  can 
draw  snow  down  from  the  North  to  trouble  us  here  three 
hundred  leagues  away.’ 

‘His  arm  has  grown  long,’  said  Gandalf.
Soon  they  had  a  merry  crackle  of  flame 
at  the  foot  of  a  large  fir-tree  and  they  sat  round  it  for  a  while, 
until  they  began  to  nod.
The  Mirror  seemed  to  be  growing  hot  and  curls 
of  steam  were  rising  from  the  water.
You’ll  want 
it,  if  you  haven’t  got  it.”  Well,  I’ll  want  it.
The  Ring  left  him.’ 

‘What,  just  in  time  to  meet  Bilbo?’  said  Frodo.
‘What  do  you  say  to  fire?’  asked  Boromir  suddenly.
‘The  Three  were  not  made  by  Sauron, 
nor  did  he  ever  touch  them.
Lying  round  Bree-hill  and  the 
villages  was  a  small  country  of  fields  and  tamed  woodland 
only  a  few  miles  broad.
‘Not  very  near,  and  yet  too  near,  it  seems.’ 

‘I  feared  as  much,’  said  Aragorn.
I  should  very 
much  like  just  to  peep  at  it  again.’ 

‘Yes,  I’ve  got  it,’  answered  Frodo,  feeling  a  strange  reluc¬ 
tance.
We’re  going  to  have 
trouble  when  he  comes  back.
‘Good-bye,  Gandalf!
The  afternoon  was  wearing  away  when  they  scrambled  and 
stumbled  into  a  fold  that  was  wider  and  deeper  than  any  they 
had  yet  met.
Through  the  opening  a  shadowy  stair  could  be  seen 
climbing  steeply  up;  but  beyond  the  lower  steps  the  darkness 
was  deeper  than  the  night.
Spoons?
But  he 
had  no  close  friends,  until  some  of  his  younger  cousins  began 
to  grow  up.
Suddenly 
under  the  trees  a  fire  sprang  up  with  a  red  light.
But  it’ll  come  back,  when  I  have  time  to  think.
Some  dwarf-gates  will  open  only  at  special  times,  or 


398 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


r 


t 


Eerc'  is  written  in  the]FeanorUm  cViaroders  accord¬ 
ing  to  tHe'mode'of  Beleriand:  Grown  Duriu  \tarL 
ruoria;  pedo  meUonamiuno/Jm  uarvi  haineaw 
ant:  Cetebvimboro  Greyon teithontri thiw nin.
They  went  back  to  the  path  that  still  went  on  along  the 
west  side  of  the  Silverlode,  and  for  some  way  they  followed 
it  southward.
Merry  and  Pippin  dragged  themselves  forward  and  lay 
down  with  their  backs  to  the  willow-trunk.
For  if  you  fail,  then  we  are  laid  bare  to  the  Enemy.
As  they 
passed  her  they  turned  and  their  eyes  watched  her  slowly 
floating  away  from  them.
Here  and 
there  a  misty  star  peered  out.
Away  in  the  South  a  dark  patch 
appeared,  and  grew,  and  drove  north  like  flying  smoke  in  the 
wind.
‘Here,’  said  Elrond,  turning  to  Gandalf,  ‘is  Boromir,  a  man 
from  the  South.
After  their  breakfast  the  hobbits  had  to  re -pack,  and  get 
together  further  supplies  for  the  longer  journey  they  were 
now  expecting.
What  is  to  be  my  quest?
‘You  have  never  been  like  this  before.
The  midmost  stood  somewhat  forward  from  the  others  and 
sundered  from  them,  an  island  in  the  waters,  about  which 
the  flowing  River  flung  pale  shimmering  arms.
About 
it  stood  fir-trees,  short  and  bent,  and  its  sides  were  steep 
and  clothed  with  harts-tongue  and  shrubs  of  whortle-berry.
The  stone  vanished  with  a  soft  slap;  but  at  the  same  instant 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


401 


there  was  a  swish  and  a  bubble.
She  shone  like  a  window  of  glass  upon  a 
far  hill  in  the  westering  sun,  or  as  a  remote  lake  seen  from  a 
mountain:  a  crystal  fallen  in  the  lap  of  the  land.
The  path  seemed  to  be  making 
directly  for  it.
After  stumbling  along  for  some  way  along  the  stream,  they 
came  quite  suddenly  out  of  the  gloom.
Many  fives  of  his  small  kind.
Sam  had  begged  to  be 
allowed  to  wait  on  his  master,  but  had  been  told  that  for  this 
time  he  was  a  guest  of  honour.
Fang!
With  a  ping  and  a  pong  the  fiddle-strings  broke!
Bilbo,  sir,  and  dragons,  and  a  fiery  mountain,  and  -  and 
Elves,  sir.
You  must  forgive  them  all;  for  though  their 
hearts  are  faithful,  to  face  fear  of  Barrow-wights  is  not  what 
they  were  made  for.
Only  the  change  in  the  level  of  the  ground  at  his  feet  told 
him  when  he  at  last  came  to  the  top  of  a  ridge  or  hill.
Boffin  at 
Overhill  and  goes  up  to  the  Northfarthing  for  the  hunting.
Do  you  mean  that  this  is 
the  very  Gollum-creature  that  Bilbo  met?
It  was  plain  that  many  people  regarded  them  now  as  the 
companions  of  a  travelling  magician  of  unknown  powers  and 
purpose.
Here  they  rested.
Rams  and  hammers  were  beating  against  it.
All  about  them  as  they  lay  hung  the  dark¬ 
ness,  hollow  and  immense,  and  they  were  oppressed  by  the 
loneliness  and  vastness  of  the  dolven  halls  and  endlessly 
branching  stairs  and  passages.
Here  and  there  old  trees 
had  been  cut  or  broken  down,  and  large  rocks  cloven  or 
heaved  aside  to  make  a  way.
246  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

They  stood  for  a  while  silent  on  the  hill-top,  near  its  south¬ 
ward  edge.
Sam  is  already  getting  breakfast 
ready.
So  ended  the  attempt  to 
retake  Moria!
But  after  a 
time  their  hearts  and  spirits  rose  high  again,  and  their  voices 
rang  out  in  mirth  and  laughter.
‘It  is  long  indeed  since  any  of  my  folk  have 
looked  on  it,  yet  still  we  remember  it  in  song.
‘You  had  better  go  now.’ 

‘You  can  come  too,’  said  Frodo,  ‘and  bring  all  the  water- 
bottles.’  There  was  a  stream  at  the  foot  of  the  hill.
And  Minas 
Ithil  they  built,  Tower  of  the  Rising  Moon,  eastward  upon  a 
shoulder  of  the  Mountains  of  Shadow;  and  westward  at  the 
feet  of  the  White  Mountains  Minas  Anor  they  made,  Tower 
of  the  Setting  Sun.
‘But  the  Ring  was  lost.
It  was  rutted  and  bore  many  signs  of  the  recent  heavy 
rain;  there  were  pools  and  pot-holes  full  of  water.
Then 
he  spoke  many  single  words  of  Elvish  speech.
How  many  are  you?’ 


LOTHLORIEN 


447 


‘Eight,’  said  Legolas.
“They 
have  crossed  the  River.
I  rode  under  the  arch,  and  the  gate 
closed  silently  behind  me,  and  suddenly  I  was  afraid,  though 
I  knew  no  reason  for  it.
He  sprang  up  and  turned;  but  all  that 


5 1 8 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


he  saw  to  his  surprise  was  Boromir,  and  his  face  was  smiling 
and  kind.
We  cannot  get  out.
‘We  will  venture  one  more  journey 
by  night.
Well,  four  nights  and  three  days,  to  be  exact.
There  was  little  speech  and  no  laughter  in  any  of  the  boats.
Pippin  and  Sam 
strapped  up  their  three  packs  and  piled  them  in  the  porch.
‘But  as  for  your  business - ’  He  got  up  and  went  to  the 

door,  opened  it  quickly  and  looked  out.
I’ll  sing  a  wind  up  and  blow  leaf  and  branch 
away.
But  of  them  it  is  not  permitted 
to  speak.
‘Here’s  a  pretty  hobbit-skin 
to  wrap  an  elven-princeling  in!
The 
miserable  creature  must  have  been  hiding  in  the  woods  by 
the  Silverlode,  watching  us  start  off!’ 

‘That’s  about  it,’  said  Sam.
The  best  beer  in  the  East¬ 
farthing,  or  used  to  be:  it  is  a  long  time  since  I  tasted  it.’ 

‘That  settles  it!’  said  Frodo.
Come 
on!’ 

He  led  Frodo  back  to  his  own  little  room.
‘Hurray!’  cried  Pippin,  springing  up.
He  was  worried.
How  far  it  stretched 
away  southward  they  could  not  see  in  the  failing  light;  but  its 
northern  end  was  no  more  than  half  a  mile  from  where  they 
stood,  and  between  the  stony  ridges  that  enclosed  the  valley 


394  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

and  the  water’s  edge  there  was  a  rim  of  open  ground.
‘Loud  and  clear  it  sounds  in  the  valleys  of  the  hills,’  he 
said,  ‘and  then  let  all  the  foes  of  Gondor  flee!’  Putting  it  to 
his  lips  he  blew  a  blast,  and  the  echoes  leapt  from  rock  to 
rock,  and  all  that  heard  that  voice  in  Rivendell  sprang  to  their 
feet.
says  I  to  the  Gaffer.
And  I  learned  also  that  he 
had  possessed  it  long.
And  seated  a  little  apart 
was  a  tall  man  with  a  fair  and  noble  face,  dark-haired  and 
grey-eyed,  proud  and  stern  of  glance.
‘It  has  not  taken  you  long  to  lose  us,’  he  said.
Here 
the  world  is  cold  until  the  sudden  spring,  and  we  may  yet 
have  snow  again.
‘I  wonder?’  said  Aragorn.
Frodo  lay  for  a  while  fighting  with  the  sleep  that  was  over¬ 
powering  him;  then  with  an  effort  he  struggled  to  his  feet 
again.
‘It  depends  on  many 
chances.
But  Strider  was  now 
leaning  forward,  stooped  to  the  ground,  with  a  hand  to  his 
ear,  and  a  look  of  joy  on  his  face.
And  if  ever  I  return  to  the 
smithies  of  my  home,  it  shall  be  set  in  imperishable  crystal 
to  be  an  heirloom  of  my  house,  and  a  pledge  of  good  will 
between  the  Mountain  and  the  Wood  until  the  end  of 
days.’ 

Then  the  Lady  unbraided  one  of  her  long  tresses,  and  cut 
off  three  golden  hairs,  and  laid  them  in  Gimli’s  hand.
But  the 
gap  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Wise  has  been  filled  at  last.
Horsemen  were  galloping  on  the  grass  of  Rohan;  wolves 
poured  from  Isengard.
I  saw  nothing,  but  I  didn’t  stop  to  look.’ 

‘I  saw  something,’  said  Merry;  ‘or  I  thought  I  did  -  away 
westwards  where  the  moonlight  was  falling  on  the  flats 
beyond  the  shadow  of  the  hill-tops,  I  thought  there  were  two 
or  three  black  shapes.
Said  he  to  Troll:  ‘Pray,  what  is  yon?
And  even  so  he  would  never  have  just  forsaken  it,  or  cast 
it  aside.
Then  the  Eye  began  to  rove,  searching  this  way  and  that; 
and  Frodo  knew  with  certainty  and  horror  that  among  the 
many  things  that  it  sought  he  himself  was  one.
But  in  these 
days  of  watchfulness  we  do  not  make  bridges.
There  flying  Elwing  came  to  him, 
and  flame  was  in  the  darkness  lit; 
more  bright  than  light  of  diamond 
the  fire  upon  her  carcanet.
But 
you’ll  find  maybe  that  more  folk  than  old  Harry  at  the  gate 
will  be  asking  you  questions.
Some  way 
below  the  mere  they  came  on  a  deep  well  of  water,  clear  as 
crystal,  from  which  a  freshet  fell  over  a  stone  lip  and  ran 
glistening  and  gurgling  down  a  steep  rocky  channel.
’ 

‘Well  answered!’  said  Strider  laughing.
And  I  should  have 
killed  you  already  without  so  much  talk.
Below,  though  the 
threads  were  in  places  blurred  or  broken,  the  outline  could 
be  seen  of  an  anvil  and  a  hammer  surmounted  by  a  crown 
with  seven  stars.
It  was  close  on  ten  o’clock  before  they  at  last 
got  off.
‘Sam!’  he  called.
MANY  MEETINGS 


287 


‘Yes,  I,  Gandalf  the  Grey,’  said  the  wizard  solemnly.
But  that 
is  miles  out  of  the  way.
It  was  early  April  and  the  sky  was  now  clearing  after  heavy 
rain.
Bilbo  when  I  was  a  lad.
Frodo,’  said  Sam  (in  spite 
of  private  misgivings  and  a  deep  regret  for  the  best  beer  in 
the  Eastfarthing) .
They  rode  across  and  looked  northwards.
When  they  had  eaten,  Aragorn  called  the  Company 
together.
‘Gondor  wanes,  you  say.
I  was  professionally  interested  in 
your  ring,  you  may  say;  and  I  still  am.
Glorfindel  was  tall  and  straight;  his  hair  was  of  shining 
gold,  his  face  fair  and  young  and  fearless  and  full  of  joy;  his 
eyes  were  bright  and  keen,  and  his  voice  like  music;  on  his 
brow  sat  wisdom,  and  in  his  hand  was  strength.
And  I  don’t  miss 
Gandalf ’s  fireworks,  but  his  bushy  eyebrows,  and  his  quick 
temper,  and  his  voice.’ 

‘You’re  right,’  said  Sam.
Baggins,  I  should  like  a  quiet  word  with  you.’ 

What  about?’  asked  Frodo,  ignoring  the  sudden  use  of  his 
proper  name.
Then  world  behind  and  home  ahead, 

We’ll  wander  back  to  home  and  bed.
We  will  stay  here  for  a  while.
‘It  is  no  good  trying 
to  escape  you.
Beren 
was  a  mortal  man,  but  Luthien  was  the  daughter  of  Thingol, 
a  King  of  Elves  upon  Middle-earth  when  the  world  was 
young;  and  she  was  the  fairest  maiden  that  has  ever  been 
among  all  the  children  of  this  world.
Fare  you  well!
He  had  hardly  closed 
his  eyes  all  night  (so  he  said),  but  he  had  never  heard  a  sound.
The  wind  blew  chill 
through  the  pass,  and  they  heard  the  tree-tops  lower  down 
moaning  and  sighing.
The  last  lines  run  the  pool  is  up  to  the  wall 
at  Westgate.
‘No,  but  I  felt  it,  whatever  it  was,’  he  answered.
My  packet  is  quite  light,’ 
said  Sam  stoutly  and  untruthfully.
‘Or  at  least,  so  I  guess.’ 

‘Ah!’  said  Aragorn.
There  they  sat  for  some  while,  looking  through  the 
window  at  the  bright  stars  above  the  steep-climbing  woods, 
and  talking  softly.
I  am  not  asking  you  to  tell  me  anything  you  have  a  mind 
to  keep  to  yourself;  but  I  see  you  are  in  some  kind  of  trouble.
You 
had  best  walk  in  the  middle  so  that  you  may  not  stray.
He  looked  gravely 
at  Frodo.
They  sat  on  the  green  edge  and 
looked  out  over  the  woods  below  them,  while  they  ate  their 
mid-day  meal.
Where  be  you  a-going?
I  would  give  them  Bag  End  and 
everything  else,  if  I  could  get  Bilbo  back  and  go  off  tramping 
in  the  country  with  him.
He 
thought  there  were  two  eyes,  very  cold  though  lit  with  a  pale 
light  that  seemed  to  come  from  some  remote  distance.
First  he  was  a  conspirator,  now  he’s 
a  jester.
‘What  is  the  matter,  Strider?’  Merry  called  up.
A  low  door-like  opening  appeared  at  the  end  of 


i86 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


the  chamber  beyond  Frodo’s  feet;  and  there  was  Tom’s  head 
(hat,  feather,  and  all)  framed  against  the  light  of  the  sun 
rising  red  behind  him.
Frodo  jumped  up  and  stood  on  a  table,  and  began  to  talk.
The  attention  of  Pippin’s  audience  was  disturbed.
Haldir  turned 
towards  the  Company.
As  the  cheerless 
shadows  of  the  early  evening  began  to  fall  the  Company 
made  ready  to  set  out.
Then  he  heard  a  noise  in  the  distance.
But  maybe  there  has 
been  some  change  of  counsel  that  we  have  not  heard.
Though  all  is  now  snow-clad,  our  path,  as 
we  came  up,  turned  about  that  shoulder  of  rock  down  yonder.
Nonetheless  they  saw  no  sign  of  any  enemy  that  day,  nor 
the  next.
There  he  was  calmly 
sitting  in  a  chair  by  the  door!
I  will  take 
it  as  a  sign  that  we  may  pass  the  Bridge;  but  beyond  that  I 
dare  not  keep  to  the  Road,  without  some  clearer  token.’ 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


263 


At  once  they  went  on  again.
He 
had  keen  eyes  in  the  dark.
He  must  have  put  the  Ring  on.
He  sat  with  his  head 
bowed,  either  in  despair  or  in  anxious  thought.
‘Lothlorien!’  cried  Legolas.
The  hobbits  climbed  up  and  watched  him  until  he  was  out 
of  sight.
This  is  what  happened,  as  far  as 
I  can  gather.
Let  us  eat  quickly 
and  go!’ 

That  day  the  weather  changed  again,  almost  as  if  it  was 
at  the  command  of  some  power  that  had  no  longer  any  use 
for  snow,  since  they  had  retreated  from  the  pass,  a  power 
that  wished  now  to  have  a  clear  light  in  which  things  that 
moved  in  the  wild  could  be  seen  from  far  away.
At  any  rate  you  are 
not  ready  for  that  long  road  yet.’ 

‘No  indeed!’  said  Frodo.
‘But 
this  one  is  taller  than  some  and  fairer  than  most,  and  he  has  a 
cleft  in  his  chin:  perky  chap  with  a  bright  eye.
It  is  a  strange  road,  and  folk  are  glad  to  reach  their 
journey’s  end,  whether  the  time  is  long  or  short.
He  looked  at  maps,  and  wondered  what  lay 
beyond  their  edges:  maps  made  in  the  Shire  showed  mostly 
white  spaces  beyond  its  borders.
They  bowed,  but  with  a  wave  of  her  arm  she  bade 
them  look  round;  and  they  looked  out  from  the  hill-top  over 
lands  under  the  morning.
Away  over  the  flats  they 
could  glimpse  the  low  hill  of  Bucklebury  across  the  River, 
but  it  was  now  to  their  left.
Not  if  some  better  way  can  be 
contrived?” 

‘He  came  and  laid  his  long  hand  on  my  arm.
‘But  it  would  be  too  tiring  to  repeat  it  all.’ 

‘Not  too  tiring  for  you,’  the  Elves  answered  laughing.
Dimly  Frodo  saw  the 
river  below  him  rise,  and  down  along  its  course  there  came  a 
plumed  cavalry  of  waves.
Frodo 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


107 


and  his  companions  wrapped  themselves  in  cloaks  and 
blankets,  and  drowsiness  stole  over  them.
Nothing  was  moving  on  it.
The  light  and  music  of  Rivendell 


MANY  MEETINGS 


303 


was  about  him  again.
For  I  am  too  strong  for  you,  halfling,’  he  cried;  and 
suddenly  he  sprang  over  the  stone  and  leaped  at  Frodo.
I’ve  heard  that  he  used  to  go  into  the  Old  Forest  at  one  time, 
and  he  has  the  reputation  of  knowing  a  good  many  strange 
things.
After  a  rest  they  had  a  good  lunch, 
and  then  more  rest.
‘Come  dear  folk!
They  slept  uneasily  during  the 
middle  of  the  day,  in  some  hollow  of  the  land,  or  hidden 
under  the  tangled  thorn-bushes  that  grew  in  thickets  in  many 
places.
A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


231 


awaice!
Then  he  heard  faintly  a  sound  like 
sniffing;  and  something  seemed  to  be  scrabbling  on  the  bark 
of  the  tree-trunk.
He  only  wept 
and  called  us  cruel,  with  many  a  gollum  in  his  throat;  and 
when  we  pressed  him  he  whined  and  cringed,  and  rubbed 
his  long  hands,  licking  his  fingers  as  if  they  pained  him,  as  if 
he  remembered  some  old  torture.
‘Have  hope!’  said  Boromir.
‘A  lot  may  happen  in  that  time.’ 

‘It  may,’  said  Strider.
On  the  land  of  Lorien  there  was 
no  stain.
Merry  and  Pippin  were  indignant  when  they 
heard  that  Sam  had  crept  into  the  Council,  and  had  been 
chosen  as  Frodo’s  companion.
’ 

Frodo  said  nothing,  but  he  put  his  hand  under  his  tunic 
and  touched  the  rings  of  his  mail-shirt.
‘Well,  well,  bless  my  beard!’  said  Gandalf.
It  will  not  keep  you  on  your  road,  nor 
defend  you  against  any  peril;  but  if  you  keep  it  and  see  your 
home  again  at  last,  then  perhaps  it  may  reward  you.
Then  he  sprang  ashore  and 
climbed  a  few  paces  up  the  bank.
You  shall  go  away  with  Mr.
‘I  feel  much  better, 
but  I  don’t  think  I  could  sing.
The  Riders  halted,  but  Frodo  had  not  the  power 
of  Bombadil.
One  hundred  and  forty- 
four  flabbergasted  hobbits  sat  back  speechless.
They  do 
say  they  are  going  to  the  harbours,  out  away  beyond  the 
White  Towers.’  Sam  waved  his  arm  vaguely:  neither  he  nor 
any  of  them  knew  how  far  it  was  to  the  Sea,  past  the  old 
towers  beyond  the  western  borders  of  the  Shire.
‘There  are  the  Walls  of  Moria,’  said  Gandalf,  pointing 
across  the  water.
A  false  rumour 
that  the  whole  household  was  being  distributed  free  spread 
like  wildfire;  and  before  long  the  place  was  packed  with 
people  who  had  no  business  there,  but  could  not  be  kept  out.
and  merry-o, 

Goldberry,  Goldberry,  merry  yellow  berry-o!
He  saw  no  colour  but  those  he 
knew,  gold  and  white  and  blue  and  green,  but  they  were  fresh 
and  poignant,  as  if  he  had  at  that  moment  first  perceived 
them  and  made  for  them  names  new  and  wonderful.
It  was  the  night  of  the  fifth 
of  October,  and  they  were  six  days  out  from  Bree.
She  seemed  to  be  looking  inside  me 
and  asking  me  what  I  would  do  if  she  gave  me  the  chance  of 
flying  back  home  to  the  Shire  to  a  nice  little  hole  with  -  with 
a  bit  of  garden  of  my  own.’ 

‘That’s  funny,’  said  Merry.
I  may  be  able  to 
tell  you  something  when  I  come  back.
Wolves  and 
ores  were  housed  in  Isengard,  for  Saruman  was  mustering  a 
great  force  on  his  own  account,  in  rivalry  of  Sauron  and  not 
in  his  service,  yet.
‘A  letter  for  me  from  Gandalf !’  cried  Frodo.
‘Here  is  a  nice  little  parlour!’  he  said.
Looking  through  an  opening  on  the  south  side  of  the  flet 
Frodo  saw  all  the  valley  of  the  Silverlode  lying  like  a  sea  of 
fallow  gold  tossing  gently  in  the  breeze.
Bilbo  drew  his  hand  over  his  eyes.
‘This  is  where  the 
stream  ran:  Sirannon,  the  Gate-stream,  they  used  to  call  it.
It  is  told  that  Elendil  stood  there 
watching  for  the  coming  of  Gil-galad  out  of  the  West,  in  the 
days  of  the  Last  Alliance.’ 

The  hobbits  gazed  at  Strider.
Master  Elrond  will  summon  us 
all  ere  long,  I  believe,  and  then  we  shall  all  hear  many  things.
By 
our  valour  the  wild  folk  of  the  East  are  still  restrained,  and 
the  terror  of  Morgul  kept  at  bay;  and  thus  alone  are  peace 
and  freedom  maintained  in  the  lands  behind  us,  bulwark  of 
the  West.
The  Moon  is  almost  spent,  and  it  will  be  dark  tonight.’ 

‘Come  with  me,  Frodo!’  cried  the  dwarf,  springing  from 
the  road.
He  said  that  he  did  not  think  Bilbo  was 


56 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


dead.
‘And  after  waiting  sixty 
years.
In  the  dark  at  the  rear,  grim  and  silent,  walked 
Aragorn.
Run 
for  it!’ 

Aragorn  picked  up  Frodo  where  he  lay  by  the  wall  and 
made  for  the  stair,  pushing  Merry  and  Pippin  in  front  of  him.
In  panoply  of  ancient  kings, 
in  chained  rings  he  armoured  him; 
his  shining  shield  was  scored  with  runes 
to  ward  all  wounds  and  harm  from  him; 
his  bow  was  made  of  dragon-horn, 
his  arrows  shorn  of  ebony, 
of  silver  was  his  habergeon, 


MANY  MEETINGS 


305 


his  scabbard  of  chalcedony; 
his  sword  of  steel  was  valiant, 
of  adamant  his  helmet  tall, 
an  eagle-plume  upon  his  crest, 
upon  his  breast  an  emerald.
But  at  least  the  passage 
behind  us  was  completely  blocked.
‘Is  it,  as  I  think,  an  eagle?’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Legolas.
Cabbages  and  potatoes  are 
better  for  me  and  yon.
I  deemed  it  the  worst  part  of  all  my 
journey,  the  road  back,  watching  him  day  and  night,  making 
him  walk  before  me  with  a  halter  on  his  neck,  gagged,  until 
he  was  tamed  by  lack  of  drink  and  food,  driving  him  ever 
towards  Mirkwood.
This  tale 
I  must  tell  in  full,  for  only  Elrond  has  heard  it  yet,  and  that 
in  brief;  but  it  will  bear  on  all  that  we  must  resolve.
There  was  a  bellow,  and  the  foot  jerked  back, 
nearly  wrenching  Sting  from  Frodo’s  arm.
’ 

‘Very  well.
An  exclamation  of  dismay  came  from  the  empty  boat.
Gollum’s 
sharp  ears  would  soon  learn  what  he  wanted.’ 

‘Then  why  didn’t  he  track  Bilbo  further?’  asked  Frodo.
Legolas  ran  lightly  up,  and  Frodo  followed  slowly;  behind 
came  Sam  trying  not  to  breathe  loudly.
I  think  that  in  the  end,  if  all  else  is  con¬ 
quered,  Bombadil  will  fall,  Last  as  he  was  First;  and  then 
Night  will  come.’ 

‘I  know  little  of  Iarwain  save  the  name,’  said  Galdor;  ‘but 
Glorfindel,  I  think,  is  right.
After  some  discussion  they 
decided  to  leave  this  misleading  path  and  strike  northward; 
for  although  they  had  not  been  able  to  see  it  from  the  hill-top, 
the  Road  must  lie  that  way,  and  it  could  not  be  many  miles 
off.
‘I  tried  to  follow.
That  ain’t  no  secret.
There  was  a 
squawk,  and  up  came  Sam  Gamgee’s  curly  head  hauled  by 
one  ear.
There  is  no  hope  left  in  Elves  or  dying  Numenor.
As  he  lay  there,  thinking  and  getting  a  hold  of  himself,  he 
noticed  all  at  once  that  the  darkness  was  slowly  giving  way: 
a  pale  greenish  light  was  growing  round  him.
‘Trolls  do  not  build.
‘I 
don’t  agree.
He  looked  at  Frodo  and  smiled.
He 
recalled  Bilbo’s  account  of  his  journey  and  the  threatening 
towers  on  the  hills  north  of  the  Road,  in  the  country  near 
the  Trolls’  wood  where  his  first  serious  adventure  had 
happened.
I 
would  choose  Minas  Tirith,  but  if  he  does  not,  then  I  follow 
him.’ 

‘And  I  too  will  go  with  him,’  said  Legolas.
‘The  birds  and  beasts  do  not 
tell  tales  of  that  sort.’ 

‘The  heirs  of  Elendil  do  not  forget  all  things  past,’  said 
Sttider;  ‘and  many  more  things  than  I  can  tell  are  remem¬ 
bered  in  Rivendell.’ 

‘Have  you  often  been  to  Rivendell?’  said  Frodo.
I  gave  a  shout,  but  when  I  got  up  to  the  spot  there 
was  no  signs  of  them,  and  only  Mr.
Bag  End 
began  to  be  busy.
Floi  was  killed  by 
an  arrow.
As  soon  as  he  saw  the  dark 
shapes  creep  from  the  garden,  he  knew  that  he  must  run  for 
it,  or  perish.
Let 
us  hurry!
Mae  govannen!
‘You  are  not  alone.
Once  more!’ 

They  made  Frodo  have  another  drink,  and  then  begin  his 
song  again,  while  many  of  them  joined  in;  for  the  tune  was 
well  known,  and  they  were  quick  at  picking  up  words.
‘How,  how  on 
earth  did  it  come  to  me?’ 

‘Ah!’  said  Gandalf.
Good  night  to 
you!’ 

Footsteps  went  away  down  the  Hill.
‘Behind  that  there  was  something  else  at  work,  beyond  any 
design  of  the  Ring-maker.
At 
least,  that  is  how  I  see  it.’ 

Frodo  caught  something  new  and  strange  in  Boromir’s 
glance,  and  he  looked  hard  at  him.
What  have  you  to  say  to  that?’ 

‘That  you  are  a  stout  fellow,’  answered  Strider;  ‘but  I  am 
afraid  my  only  answer  to  you,  Sam  Gamgee,  is  this.
in  their  clear,  high,  hobbit-voices.
That  name  the  hobbits  only  knew  in  legends  of  the  dark 
past,  like  a  shadow  in  the  background  of  their  memories;  but 
it  was  ominous  and  disquieting.
People  came  and  began  (by  orders) 
to  clear  away  the  pavilions  and  the  tables  and  the  chairs,  and 
the  spoons  and  knives  and  bottles  and  plates,  and  the  lanterns, 
and  the  flowering  shrubs  in  boxes,  and  the  crumbs  and 
cracker-paper,  the  forgotten  bags  and  gloves  and  handker¬ 
chiefs,  and  the  uneaten  food  (a  very  small  item).
She  stood  before  Frodo  seeming  now  tall  beyond 
measurement,  and  beautiful  beyond  enduring,  terrible  and 
worshipful.
‘Wait  for 
me,  Sam,’  he  stammered.
They  lived  mostly 
in  Staddle  though  there  were  some  in  Bree  itself,  especially 
on  the  higher  slopes  of  the  hill,  above  the  houses  of  the  Men.
Sam  they  left  behind,  fast  asleep  still  with 
a  smile  on  his  face.
Not  until  the  grey  of  dawn  did  he  allow  them 
to  halt.
He  sat  down  upon  the  stone  and  cupped  his  chin  in  his 
hands,  staring  eastwards  but  seeing  little  with  his  eyes.
Do  you  realize 
that  this  is  the  very  path  that  goes  through  Mirkwood,  and 
that  if  you  let  it,  it  might  take  you  to  the  Lonely  Mountain 
or  even  further  and  to  worse  places?”  He  used  to  say  that  on 
the  path  outside  the  front  door  at  Bag  End,  especially  after 
he  had  been  out  for  a  long  walk.’ 

‘Well,  the  Road  won’t  sweep  me  anywhere  for  an  hour  at 
least,’  said  Pippin,  unslinging  his  pack.
And  I  have  seen 
it  only  for  an  instant  in  the  house  of  Elrond.
You  will  soon  be  well,  if  I  do 
not  talk  you  to  death.
From  the  time  of  Gandalf ’s  arrival 
he  remained  hidden  from  view.
Pippin  was  dragging  behind.
‘Come  back!
‘No!
However,  in  the  meanwhile  for  all  Mr.
‘These  are  evil  tidings,’  said  Celeborn,  ‘the 
most  evil  that  have  been  spoken  here  in  long  years  full  of 
grievous  deeds.’  He  turned  to  Haldir.
Not  until  the  morning!’ 


i66 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘That  is  right!’  said  the  old  man.
Even  as  he  swooned 
he  caught,  as  through  a  swirling  mist,  a  glimpse  of  Strider 
leaping  out  of  the  darkness  with  a  flaming  brand  of  wood  in 
either  hand.
Tiniwiel!
But  let  us  go  on  down  warily, 
and  we  shall  see.’ 

The  path  went  on  again  from  the  door,  and  turning  to  the 
right  again  across  the  level  space  plunged  down  a  thick 
wooded  slope.
Fire  and  lamp,  and  meat  and  bread, 

And  then  to  bed!
But  great  though  his  lore 
may  be,  it  must  have  a  source.
‘I  guess  that  is 
where  we  now  stand.’ 

‘Well,  I  can  read  no  more  for  a  long  way,’  said  Gandalf, 
‘except  the  word  gold,  and  Dunn’s  Axe  and  something  helm.
All  at  once  back  into  his  mind,  from  which  it  had  disappeared 
with  the  first  coming  of  the  fog,  came  the  memory  of  the 
house  down  under  the  Hill,  and  of  Tom  singing.
Lanterns  were  hung  on  all  its  branches.
But  it  seems 
impossible,  somehow,  to  feel  gloomy  or  depressed  in  this 
place.
Is  that  enough  for  us?
‘Be  of 
good  hope!
That  we  now  know  too  well.
‘Is  there  more  in  it  than  sur¬ 
prise  at  seeing  four  hobbits,  not  to  mention  the  rest  of  us, 
where  people  are  so  seldom  seen  or  heard?’ 

‘I  hope  that  is  it,’  answered  Aragorn.
His  plan,  as  far  as  they  could  understand  it  without  know¬ 
ing  the  country,  was  to  go  towards  Archet  at  first,  but  to  bear 
right  and  pass  it  on  the  east,  and  then  to  steer  as  straight  as 
he  could  over  the  wild  lands  to  Weathertop  Hill.
‘Everything  packed  and 
labelled?’ 

‘Everything,’  they  answered.
That’s  what  his  trouble  is.
That  night  they  set  a  watch,  and 
Strider,  it  seemed,  did  not  sleep  at  all.
‘But  we  will  put  it  to  the  test 
one  day.’ 

‘May  the  day  not  be  too  long  delayed,’  said  Boromir.
I  have  had  a  hard  life  and 
a  long;  and  the  leagues  that  lie  between  here  and  Gondor  are 
a  small  part  in  the  count  of  my  journeys.
‘Me  go  and  see  Elves  and  all!
You  have  come  and  are  here  met,  in  this  very 
nick  of  time,  by  chance  as  it  may  seem.
Frodo  then  drew  the  elf-blade  from  its  sheath.
They  had  packs  to  carry, 
and  the  bushes  and  brambles  were  reluctant  to  let  them 
through.
The  wind  puffed 
out.
‘If  you  are  a  friend, 
speak  the  password,  and  the  doors  will  open,  and  you  can 
enter.’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘these  doors  are  probably  governed  by 
words.
We  must 
have  turned  eastwards  in  the  night.’ 

‘No,’  said  Gandalf.
They  spoke  the 
name  of  Elbereth!’  said  Frodo  in  amazement.
There  it  is!’ 

Frodo  took  the  envelope  from  the  mantelpiece,  and  glanced 
at  it,  but  did  not  open  it.
It  would  be  well  to  draw 
your  sword.’ 

‘Why?’  said  Frodo.
Frodo  into  a  dragon’s  den,  if  I  led  him,’ 
protested  Sam.
With  perfect  truth:  for  Bilbo 
was  very  polite  to  him,  calling  him  ‘Master  Hamfast’,  and 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


29 


consulting  him  constantly  upon  the  growing  of  vegetables  - 
in  the  matter  of  ‘roots’,  especially  potatoes,  the  Gaffer  was 
recognized  as  the  leading  authority  by  all  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  (including  himself) .
Gandalf,  sir!’  said  Sam.
Pippin  was  a  little  ahead  of  the  others.
‘Come!’  the  Elves  called  to  the  hobbits.
This 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  ICHAZAD-DUM 


421 


must  be,  as  Gimli  says,  the  Chamber  of  Mazarbul;  and  the 
hall  must  be  the  twenty-first  of  the  North-end.
I  always  said  so,’  was 
probably  the  most  popular  comment.
But  if  you  look  for  a  companion,  be  careful 
in  choosing!
Though  he  had  been  healed  in  Rivendell  of  the  knife- 
stroke,  that  grim  wound  had  not  been  without  effect.
Frodo  put  the 
thing  on?
He  needs  rest.’ 

Glorhndel  caught  Frodo  as  he  sank  to  the  ground,  and 
taking  him  gently  in  his  arms  he  looked  in  his  face  with  grave 
anxiety.
You  have  leave  to  walk  over  my  land,  if  you  have  a  mind, 
Mr.
Then  he 
shut  off  the  light  again,  and  spoke  words  of  welcome  in  his 
elven-tongue.
And  you  are  the  heir  of  Bilbo,  the 
Ring-finder.’ 

‘Dear  Bilbo!’  said  Frodo  sleepily.
‘It  is  good  for  him.
A  great  desire  came  over  him  to  climb 
the  tower  and  see  the  Sea.
‘The  murder  of  Deagol  haunted  Gollum,  and  he  had  made 
up  a  defence,  repeating  it  to  his  “Precious”  over  and  over 
again,  as  he  gnawed  bones  in  the  dark,  until  he  almost 
believed  it.
Don’t  make  yourselves  too  much  at 


194 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


home!
At  last 
Frodo  spoke.
In  steep  places  stairs  of  stone  had  been  hewn,  but  now  they 
were  cracked  and  worn,  and  split  by  the  roots  of  trees.
‘Needless  were  none  of  the  deeds  of 
Gandalf  in  life.
Magic  rings  are  -  well,  magical;  and 
they  are  rare  and  curious.
Rauros  roared  endlessly  on.
The 
summit  of  Tol  Brandir  was  tipped  with  gold.
‘Not  all  of  us  look  on 
boats  as  wild  horses.
Come  on!’ 

‘Wait  a  moment!’  cried  Aragorn.
Some 
spoke  of  Moria:  the  mighty  works  of  our  fathers  that  are 
called  in  our  own  tongue  Khazad-dum;  and  they  declared 
that  now  at  last  we  had  the  power  and  numbers  to  return.’ 

Gloin  sighed.
‘Your  business  is  your  own,  no  doubt,’  said  the  man;  ‘but 
it’s  my  business  to  ask  questions  after  nightfall.’ 

We  are  hobbits  from  Buckland,  and  we  have  a  fancy  to 
travel  and  to  stay  at  the  inn  here,’  put  in  Merry.
I  will  come  to  Minas  Tirith.’ 

‘Isildur’s  Bane  is  found,  you  say,’  said  Boromir.
Frodo 
and  his  companions  huddled  round  the  fire,  wrapped  in  every 
garment  and  blanket  they  possessed;  but  Strider  was  content 
with  a  single  cloak,  and  sat  a  little  apart,  drawing  thoughtfully 
at  his  pipe.
There  was  no  sign  of  Tom  disappearing!
‘Follow  me!’  he  cried.
Keep  close  behind,  all  of  you!’ 

They  stumbled  after  him  wondering  what  had  happened.
For  in  the 
days  of  Isildur  the  Ruling  Ring  passed  out  of  all  knowledge, 
and  the  Three  were  released  from  its  dominion.
The  wind  had  gone  now  round  to  the  north-east.
The  grandson  of  Bard  the  Bowman  rules  them,  Brand  son 
of  Bain  son  of  Bard.
I  beg  that  there  should 
be  no  vote,  until  we  have  slept  on  it.
Leap 
down  the  Falls  and  land  in  the  marshes?’ 

‘No!’  answered  Aragorn.
Well,  here  we  are!’  said  Merry.
I  saw  them  away 
back  north  before  we  reached  Lorien.
There  he  wandered  long  in  a  dream  of  music  that  turned 
into  running  water,  and  then  suddenly  into  a  voice.
So  it  is  that 
Luthien  Tinuviel  alone  of  the  Elf-kindred  has  died  indeed 
and  left  the  world,  and  they  have  lost  her  whom  they  most 
loved.
What  could  not  Aragorn  do?
alas!’  cried  Legolas,  and  in  his  fair  Elvish  face  there 
was  great  distress.
I  have  never  felt  so 
spent,  but  it  is  passing.
At  last  he  passed  into 
uneasy  sleep.
Out  of  the  Black  Years  come  the 
words  that  the  Smiths  of  Eregion  heard,  and  knew  that  they 
had  been  betrayed: 

One  Ring  to  rule  them  all,  One  Ring  to  find  them,  One  Ring 
to  bring  them  all  and  in  the  Darkness  bind  them.
‘Yes,  sir!’  said  Sam.
There  long  the  golden  leaves  have  grown  upon  the  branching 
years.
He  crouched  down,  as  if  to  hide.
And  you  don’t  want  to.
Pippin!’  The 
pony  bolted  into  the  mist  and  vanished.
Frodo’s  heart  was  grieved  as  he  watched  them  walking 
beside  him  with  their  heads  down,  and  their  backs  bowed 
under  their  burdens.
F 

All  that  is  gold  does  not  glitter, 

Not  all  those  who  wander  are  lost; 

The  old  that  is  strong  does  not  wither, 

Deep  roots  are  not  reached  by  the  frost.
But  Ted 
laughed.
Three 
other  entrances  they  saw,  dark  black  arches:  one  straight 
before  them  eastwards,  and  one  on  either  side.
your  guests 
are  tired,  and  you  had  near  forgotten!
And  anyway,  unless  by  luck  we  arrive  almost 
together,  we  shall  miss  one  another;  it  will  not  be  safe  for  him 
or  for  us  to  wait  there  long.
Go 
on!
He  must  find  room  somehow.’  Nob  trotted  off  with  a  grin 
and  a  wink.
Good 
morning!’  said  Bilbo.
‘Where  are  you,  you  woolly-footed 
slowcoach?
But  now  we  spoke  of  it  again  with  longing, 
and  yet  with  dread;  for  no  dwarf  has  dared  to  pass  the  doors 
of  Khazad-dum  for  many  lives  of  kings,  save  Thror  only,  and 
he  perished.
‘But  not  alone.
I  am  not  trying  to  rob  you,  but  to  help 
you.
It  is  true  that  if 
these  hobbits  understood  the  danger,  they  would  not  dare  to 
go.
Butterbur,  looking  really  scared.
A  shudder  ran 
through  the  tree  from  root  to  tip,  and  complete  silence  fell.
‘If  it  was  a  bird, 
it  was  one  that  I  never  heard  in  the  Shire  before.’ 

‘It  was  not  bird  or  beast,’  said  Frodo.
He  walked  home  under  the  early  stars 
through  Hobbiton  and  up  the  Hill,  whistling  softly  and 
thoughtfully.
But  close  under  the 
cliff  there  stood,  still  strong  and  living,  two  tall  trees,  larger 
than  any  trees  of  holly  that  Frodo  had  ever  seen  or  imagined.
Too  deep  we  delved  there,  and  woke  the  nameless 
fear.
A  few  of  them  remained 
at  Bag  End.
Come!
It  is  my  dwarf-mail  that  Thorin  gave  me.
50 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


There  was  plenty  of  everything  left  for  Frodo.
‘Why  do  you  ask 
about  Black  Riders?’ 

‘Because  two  Black  Riders  have  overtaken  us  today,  or  one 
has  done  so  twice,’  said  Pippin;  ‘only  a  little  while  ago  he 
slipped  away  as  you  drew  near.’ 

The  Elves  did  not  answer  at  once,  but  spoke  together  softly 
in  their  own  tongue.
After  a  mile  or  two  the  lane  came  to  an  end,  crossing 
a  deep  dike,  and  climbing  a  short  slope  up  on  to  the  high- 
banked  causeway.
But  a  lie  with  a  grain  of  truth.
The  tidings  were  mostly  sad  and  ominous: 
of  gathering  darkness,  the  wars  of  Men,  and  the  flight  of  the 
Elves.
Brandybuck.
Its  beauty 


414 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


was  like  to  that  of  common  silver,  but  the  beauty  of  mithril 
did  not  tarnish  or  grow  dim.
‘I  am  so  sleepy,’  he  said,  ‘that  soon  I  shall  fall  down  on 
the  road.
He  picked  it  up  and  examined  it,  turning 
it  in  his  fingers.
It  was  generally  agreed  that  the  joke  was  in  very  bad  taste, 
and  more  food  and  drink  were  needed  to  cure  the  guests  of 
shock  and  annoyance.
Frodo  stirred,  feeling 
that  he  must  break  the  silence:  he  longed  to  shout  out  aloud.
Yet  I  do  not  believe 
that  the  world  about  us  will  ever  again  be  as  it  was  of  old,  or 
the  light  of  the  Sun  as  it  was  aforetime.
A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


255 


Over  the  lip  of  the  little  dell,  on  the  side  away  from  the 
hill,  they  felt,  rather  than  saw,  a  shadow  rise,  one  shadow  or 
more  than  one.
They  kicked  him,  and  he  bit  their 
feet.
In  fact,  he 
reminds  me  often  of  you.
Occasionally  the  most 
unfriendly  ones  may  drop  a  branch,  or  stick  a  root  out,  or 
grasp  at  you  with  a  long  trailer.
‘But  my 
memory  reaches  back  even  to  the  Elder  Days.
Her  long  yellow  hair  rippled  down  her 
shoulders;  her  gown  was  green,  green  as  young  reeds,  shot 
with  silver  like  beads  of  dew;  and  her  belt  was  of  gold,  shaped 
like  a  chain  of  flag-lilies  set  with  the  pale-blue  eyes  of  forget- 
me-nots.
‘Gil-galad  was  the  last  of  the  great  Elf-kings  of 
Middle-earth.
I  fancy  now  that  she  could  do  some  wonderful  things,  if 
she  had  a  mind.
The  ore  fell  with  cloven  head.
It  is  plain  that  we  were  meant  to  go  together.
‘No  you  don’t,  Sam!’  said  Pippin.
‘There  is  some  new  devilry  here,’  he  said,  ‘devised  for  our 
welcome,  no  doubt.
But  he’s  still  too  frightened  to 
start.
Curse  you  and  all  halflings  to  death  and  dark¬ 
ness!’  Then,  catching  his  foot  on  a  stone,  he  fell  sprawling 
and  lay  upon  his  face.
They  ate  a  very  frugal  supper  (for  hobbits),  and  then  went 
on  again.
Why  they  were 
not  all  here,  I  don’t  know;  but  I  don’t  think  they  expected  to 
be  resisted.
Frodo,’  he 
said.
What 
of  Saruman?
Wonderful!’ 

‘They  are,’  said  Frodo.
378 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘This  will  be  the  death  of  the  halflings,  Gandalf,’  said 
Boromir.
Haldir  had  gone  on  and  was  now  climbing  to  the  high  flet.
Underhill?’ 
he  asked.
‘It’s  like  this,’  he  began,  hesitating  and  looking  troubled.
Rousing  them  from  the  horror  that  seemed  to 
have  rooted  all  but  Sam  to  the  ground  where  they  stood,  he 
drove  them  forward.
That  name  even  you  hobbits  have  heard  of,  like  a  shadow  on 
the  borders  of  old  stories.
He  was  fingering  his  great  horn  and  frowning.
‘Pray,  do  not  interrupt,  my 
good  Gloin.
The  East 
Wind  was  streaming  through  the  bare  branches  of  the  trees, 
and  seething  in  the  dark  pines  on  the  hills.
I  decided  that  long  ago,  too.
Their  way  wound  along  the  floor  of  the  hollow,  and  round 
the  green  feet  of  a  steep  hill  into  another  deeper  and  broader 
valley,  and  then  over  the  shoulders  of  further  hills,  and  down 
their  long  limbs,  and  up  their  smooth  sides  again,  up  on  to 
new  hill-tops  and  down  into  new  valleys.
Where  the  other  four  may  be,  I 
do  not  know.
‘But  I  am  equally 
curious,’  he  added,  ‘to  learn  what  brings  so  important  a  dwarf 
so  far  from  the  Lonely  Mountain.’ 

Gloin  looked  at  him.
But  even  as  he  held  it 
up  in  the  growing  light,  they  gazed  in  astonishment,  for  the 
blade  seemed  to  melt,  and  vanished  like  a  smoke  in  the  air, 
leaving  only  the  hilt  in  Strider’s  hand.
From  the 
pouch  at  his  belt  he  drew  out  the  long  leaves  of  a  plant.
The  legend  of  Bilbo’s  gold  excited 
both  curiosity  and  hope;  for  legendary  gold  (mysteriously 
obtained,  if  not  positively  ill-gotten),  is,  as  everyone  knows, 
anyone’s  for  the  finding  -  unless  the  search  is  interrupted.
I  couldn’t  have  a  borne  it,  it’d  have  been  the  death  of  me.’ 

‘It  would  be  the  death  of  you  to  come  with  me,  Sam,’  said 
Frodo,  ‘and  I  could  not  have  borne  that.’ 

‘Not  as  certain  as  being  left  behind,’  said  Sam.
Tom  goes  on  before  you.
The 
drum-beats  broke  out  wildly:  doom-boom ,  doom-boom ,  and 
then  stopped.
Now  they  were  speeding 
along  with  little  hope  of  stopping  or  turning,  whatever  they 
might  meet  ahead.
He  bowed,  but  found  no 
words  to  say.
But  how  have  you  learned  all  this  about  the  Ring, 


74 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


and  about  Gollum?
I  am  content.
Sam  thought  he  could 
glimpse  black  figures  running  to  and  fro  upon  the  long 
shingle-banks  that  lay  under  the  eastern  shore.
But  there’s  no  accounting 
for  East  and  West,  as  we  say  in  Bree,  meaning  the  Rangers 
and  the  Shire-folk,  begging  your  pardon.
Darkness  came  down  quickly,  as  they  plodded 
slowly  downhill  and  up  again,  until  at  last  they  saw  lights 
twinkling  some  distance  ahead.
‘I  hope  he  will.
‘We  ought  to  be  down  at  least 
to  the  level  of  the  Gates  now.
They  were  still  climbing  gently,  but  they  now  went 
much  quicker,  and  with  better  heart;  for  it  seemed  to  them 
that  the  Forest  had  relented,  and  was  going  to  let  them  pass 
unhindered  after  all.
He 
escorted  her  firmly  off  the  premises,  after  he  had  relieved 
her  of  several  small  (but  rather  valuable)  articles  that  had 
somehow  fallen  inside  her  umbrella.
‘I  am  very  fond  indeed  of  it,  and  of  all 
the  dear  old  Shire;  but  I  think  I  need  a  holiday.’ 

‘You  mean  to  go  on  with  your  plan  then?’ 

‘I  do.
‘I  am  sorry,  Frodo!’  he  cried,  full  of  concern.
These  lay  usually  right  across  their  line  of  march, 
and  could  only  be  crossed  by  scrambling  down  and  out  again, 
which  was  troublesome  and  difficult  with  their  ponies.
It 
became  a  fireside-story  for  young  hobbits;  and  eventually 
Mad  Baggins,  who  used  to  vanish  with  a  bang  and  a  flash 
and  reappear  with  bags  of  jewels  and  gold,  became  a  favourite 
character  of  legend  and  lived  on  long  after  all  the  true  events 
were  forgotten.
We  have  a  private 
entrance.
‘There  is  one  of  my  people  yonder  across  the  stream,’  he 
said,  ‘though  you  may  not  see  him.’  He  gave  a  call  like  the 
low  whistle  of  a  bird,  and  out  of  a  thicket  of  young  trees  an 
Elf  stepped,  clad  in  grey,  but  with  his  hood  thrown  back;  his 


LOTHLORIEN 


451 


hair  glinted  like  gold  in  the  morning  sun.
The  light  grew  before  them;  great  shafts 
pierced  the  roof.
Frodo  was  just  yielding  to  the  temptation 
to  lie  down  again  when  a  dark  shape,  hardly  visible,  floated 
close  to  one  of  the  moored  boats.
‘This  is  the 
Hall  of  Fire,’  said  the  wizard.
‘Long  have  I  desired  to  look  upon  the 
likenesses  of  Isildur  and  Anarion,  my  sires  of  old.
‘Nob!
Frodo  did  not  prove  very  communicative,  and  he  soon 
found  himself  sitting  alone  in  a  corner,  listening  and  looking 
around.
Chapter  8 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS 


That  night  they  heard  no  noises.
The  enemy  is  upon  us!’ 

The  white  horse  leaped  forward.
Butterbur  and  Nob  came  in  again.
The  path  was  now  plain 
before  them,  well- tended  and  bordered  with  stone.
‘If  there  are  hobbit-folk  in  these  parts, 
why  don’t  we  look  for  some  that  would  be  willing  to  take  us 
in?
‘I’ve  come  to  bid  you  good  night,’  said  the  landlord,  putting 
the  candles  on  the  table.
Mrs.
But  I  count  you  blessed,  Gimli  son  of  Gloin: 
for  your  loss  you  suffer  of  your  own  free  will,  and  you  might 
have  chosen  otherwise.
And  at  the  least,  while  the  Wise  ones 
guard  this  Ring,  we  will  fight  on.
He  heard  and  saw  no  more.
‘I  can  walk  this  path,’  said  Legolas;  ‘but  the  others  have 
not  this  skill.
‘It’s  a  big  house 
this,  and  very  peculiar.
Hey!
‘I 
alone  of  you  have  ever  been  in  the  dungeons  of  the  Dark 
Lord,  and  only  in  his  older  and  lesser  dwelling  in  Dol  Guldur.
‘The  strongest  must 
seek  a  way,  say  you?
Time  doesn’t  seem  to 
pass  here:  it  just  is.
Frodo  learned  that  Grimbeorn  the 
Old,  son  of  Beorn,  was  now  the  lord  of  many  sturdy  men, 


298  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

and  to  their  land  between  the  Mountains  and  Mirkwood 
neither  ore  nor  wolf  dared  to  go.
THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


327 


‘There  I  was  at  fault,’  he  said.
Not  the  day  I 
should  have  chosen  for  letting  the  S.-B.s  into  Bag  End.
Seizing  a  horn  from  a  youngster 
nearby,  he  blew  three  loud  hoots.
They  led  their  ponies  down  the  hill; 
and  then  mounting  they  trotted  quickly  along  the  valley.
But  at  night  things  can  be 
most  alarming,  or  so  I  am  told.
Come  derry  dol!
They  will  come  again  another  night,  if  we  cannot 
escape.
Sam  had  long  ago  made  up  his  mind  that,  though  boats  were 


498 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


maybe  not  as  dangerous  as  he  had  been  brought  up  to  believe, 
they  were  far  more  uncomfortable  than  even  he  had  imag¬ 
ined.
But  even  now  there  is  hope  left.
The  land  before  them  sloped  away  southwards,  but  it 
was  wild  and  pathless;  bushes  and  stunted  trees  grew  in  dense 
patches  with  wide  barren  spaces  in  between.
‘No,  I  don’t  think  any  harm  of  old  Butterbur.
Much 
evil  must  befall  a  country  before  it  wholly  forgets  the  Elves, 
if  once  they  dwelt  there.’ 

‘That  is  true,’  said  Legolas.
‘  “If  indeed  you  look  only,  as  you  say,  for  records  of  ancient 
days,  and  the  beginnings  of  the  City,  read  on!”  he  said.
At  any  rate  I  don’t  believe  them.
‘Praised  be  the  bow  of  Galadriel,  and  the  hand  and  eye  of 
Legolas!’  said  Gimli,  as  he  munched  a  wafer  of  lembas.
Far  away  a  figure  came  slowly  down  the  road,  faint  and 
small  at  first,  but  growing  larger  and  clearer  as  it  approached.
‘We  must  have  a  look  and  see  what 
the  hammer  and  the  anvil  have  done  to  you.
They  have  taken  the  guise  of  riders  in  black.” 

‘I  knew  then  what  I  had  dreaded  without  knowing  it.
Barliman  Butterbur  was 
standing  near  the  fire,  talking  to  a  couple  of  dwarves  and  one 
or  two  strange -looking  men.
He  had  hardly  sat  down,  when  there  came  a  soft  knock  at 
the  front-door.
‘We  will  do  this,  though  it  is  against  our  liking.
‘Midgewater!
Down  along  under  Hill,  shining  in  the  sunlight, 

Waiting  on  the  doorstep  for  the  cold  starlight, 

There  my  pretty  lady  is,  River-woman’s  daughter, 

Slender  as  the  willow-wand,  clearer  than  the  water.
‘I  understand  now,’  he  said.
That  is  only  a  mirror,  be  it  clear  as 
Kheled-zaram.
‘This  is  my  last  word,’  he  said 
in  a  low  voice.
It  was  already  nearly  as  hot  as  it  had  been  the  day  before; 
but  clouds  were  beginning  to  come  up  from  the  West.
He  wondered  if  he  would  ever  again 
have  the  courage  to  leave  the  safety  of  these  stone  walls.
He  suspected 
now  that  he  had  fallen  in  with  a  rascal,  and  he  thought 
uncomfortably  that  he  had  brought  only  a  little  money  with 
him.
They  were  now  reluctant 
either  to  stay  or  go  on;  but  sooner  or  later  they  had  got  to  get 
across  the  open  country  to  the  Ferry,  and  it  was  best  to  go 
sooner  and  in  daylight.
In 
the  late  afternoon  they  came  to  a  place  where  the  Road  went 
suddenly  under  the  dark  shadow  of  tall  pine-trees,  and  then 
plunged  into  a  deep  cutting  with  steep  moist  walls  of  red 
stone.
You  have  frightened  me 
several  times  tonight,  but  never  in  the  way  that  servants  of 
the  Enemy  would,  or  so  I  imagine.
The  twisting 
and  climbing  road  had  in  many  places  almost  disappeared, 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


375 


and  was  blocked  with  many  fallen  stones.
He  wondered  at  it,  for  he  had  almost  forgotten  about  the 
Sun.
‘I  cannot  read  the  fiery  letters,’  said  Frodo  in  a  quavering 
voice.
And  are  not  the 
bridges  of  Osgiliath  broken  down  and  all  the  landings  held 
now  by  the  Enemy?
You  have  not  been  nearly  careful  or  clever  enough 
for  that!
They  were 
far  beyond  the  borders  of  the  Bree-land,  out  in  the  pathless 
wilderness,  and  drawing  near  to  the  Midgewater  Marshes.
There  was  no  sound,  only 
bright  living  images.
Tom  Bombadil  came 
trotting  round  the  corner  of  the  house,  waving  his  arms  as  if 
he  was  warding  off  the  rain  -  and  indeed  when  he  sprang 
over  the  threshold  he  seemed  quite  dry,  except  for  his  boots.
At 
last,  as  they  began  to  climb  a  steep  slope,  he  stopped  and 
yawned.
An  arrow  whistled  over  Frodo’s  head.
It  commands  a  wide  view  all  round.
‘They  are  dry,  and  some  of  their  virtue  has  gone,’  he  said, 
‘but  here  I  have  still  some  of  the  leaves  of  athelas  that  I 
gathered  near  Weathertop.
I  could  not!’  he  said  to  himself.
‘So  also  does  Frodo,  for  it 
concerns  us  closely.’  Merry  and  Pippin  looked  at  Frodo,  who 
was  staring  into  the  fire.
‘Can  horses  cross  the  river?’ 

‘They  can  go  ten  miles  north  to  Brandywine  Bridge  -  or 
they  might  swim,’  answered  Merry.
He  found  that  two  had  wandered 
on  a  good  way  along  the  path;  and  he  had  just  caught  them 
and  brought  them  back  towards  the  others,  when  he  heard 
two  noises;  one  loud,  and  the  other  soft  but  very  clear.
We  cannot,  of  course,  go  on  again  tonight,’  he  said.
I  had  ridden  very 
far  already  that  day,  and  I  was  as  weary  as  my  horse;  and  I 
needed  to  consider  matters.
The  wood  burned  merrily;  and  though  all  round  it 
the  snow  hissed,  and  pools  of  slush  crept  under  their  feet, 
they  warmed  their  hands  gladly  at  the  blaze.
They  had  gone  some  ten  miles  and  noon  was  at  hand 
when  they  came  on  a  high  green  wall.
‘I  don’t  like  this  great  big  tree.
I  recollect  the  time  when  young  Frodo  Baggins  was 
one  of  the  worst  young  rascals  of  Buckland.
Let’s  get  away  at  once!’  They  hurried  up  the 
path  to  the  top  of  the  bank,  but  when  they  looked  back  the 
far  shore  was  shrouded  in  mist,  and  nothing  could  be  seen.
The  riding  figure  sat  quite  still  with  its  head 
bowed,  as  if  listening.
How  do  you  know  about  it?’ 

‘You  have  talked  long  in  your  sleep,  Frodo,’  said  Gandalf 
gently,  ‘and  it  has  not  been  hard  for  me  to  read  your  mind 
and  memory.
‘What  an 
abominable  notion!’ 

‘It  is  true  all  the  same,’  replied  Gandalf.
Frodo  and  Pippin  remained  seated  in  silence.
‘Very  good,’  said  Haldir  at  last.
But  few  marked  what  Isildur  did.
‘That  is,  if  the  track  goes  on  so 


152 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


far,  and  does  not  simply  lead  us  into  a  bog  and  leave  us  there.
‘And  it  seemed  to  me,  too,’  said  Gimli,  ‘that  my  choice 
would  remain  secret  and  known  only  to  myself.’ 


466 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘To  me  it  seemed  exceedingly  strange,’  said  Boromir.
It  seemed  to  him  that 
he  could  hardly  hear  the  sound  of  his  own  shrill  voice:  it  was 


156 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


blown  away  from  him  by  the  willow-wind  and  drowned  in  a 
clamour  of  leaves,  as  soon  as  the  words  left  his  mouth.
Earendil, 
the  Evening  Star,  most  beloved  of  the  Elves,  shone  clear 
above.
The  cold  and  wet  had  made 
his  wound  more  painful  than  ever,  and  the  ache  and  sense  of 
deadly  chill  took  away  all  sleep.
But  you  are 
leaving  the  Shire  -  and  that  should  not  be  known,  until  you 
are  far  away.
After  some  stars  another  hand  begins,  and  I  can  see  we  found 
truesilver,  and  later  the  word  wellforged,  and  then  something, 
I  have  it!
After  a  while  he  reappeared,  and  reported  that 
there  was  fairly  solid  ground  between  the  cliff-foot  and  the 
river;  in  some  places  firm  turf  went  down  to  the  water’s  edge.
They  began  to  hum  softly, 
as  hobbits  have  a  way  of  doing  as  they  walk  along,  especially 
when  they  are  drawing  near  to  home  at  night.
We  have 
constantly  heard  you  muttering:  “Shall  I  ever  look  down 
into  that  valley  again,  I  wonder”,  and  things  like  that.
Darkness  fell.
They  had  rested  rather  less  than  five  hours  when  they  took 
to  the  Road  again.
I  have  done 
much  in  letting  you  set  foot  over  Celebrant.
It  never  rains  but  it  pours,  we  say  in  Bree.’ 

‘Hi!
‘Neither  can 
I.
Bilbo  was  doing  splendidly.
Moving 
constantly  in  and  out  of  his  talk  was  Old  Man  Willow,  and 
Frodo  learned  now  enough  to  content  him,  indeed  more  than 
enough,  for  it  was  not  comfortable  lore.
‘But  we  have  heard  rumours  of  your  coming,  for  the  mess¬ 
engers  of  Elrond  passed  by  Lorien  on  their  way  home  up  the 
Dimrill  Stair.
Fair  as  the  Sea  and  the  Sun  and  the  Snow 
upon  the  Mountain!
‘Not  for  you.
Not  far  from  the  falls 
of  Nimrodel  they  found  a  cluster  of  trees,  some  of  which 
overhung  the  stream.
Neither  shaft  nor  cry  came  again 
from  the  east  that  night.
‘Merry 
Brandybuck  is  looking  out  for  a  nice  little  hole  for  me,  or 
perhaps  a  small  house.’ 

As  a  matter  of  fact  with  Merry’s  help  he  had  already  chosen 
and  bought  a  little  house  at  Crickhollow  in  the  country 
beyond  Bucklebury.
‘Hobbits!’  he  thought.
‘I  do  not  know,  but  I  fear  the  worst,’  answered  Strider.
Sam  was  not 
there.
I’ll 
freeze  his  marrow  cold,  if  he  don’t  behave  himself.
Soon  it  appeared  as  a  great  winged 
creature,  blacker  than  the  pits  in  the  night.
Coming  to  the  opening 
they  found  that  they  had  made  their  way  down  through  a 
cleft  in  a  high  steep  bank,  almost  a  cliff.
He  shivered.
Gandalf  is  greater  than  you  Shire-folk  know  - 
as  a  rule  you  can  only  see  his  jokes  and  toys.
Clear  voices  rose  and  fell 
in  the  starlit  air.
A  fire  was  smouldering 
in  his  brown  eyes  that  would  have  made  Ted  Sandyman  step 
backwards,  if  he  had  seen  it.
‘Saruman  is  a  traitor, 
but  did  he  not  have  a  glimpse  of  wisdom?
It  was  Gil-galad,  Elven-king  and  Elendil  of 
Westernesse  who  overthrew  Sauron,  though  they  themselves 
perished  in  the  deed;  and  Isildur  Elendil’s  son  cut  the  Ring 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


69 


from  Sauron’s  hand  and  took  it  for  his  own.
It  was  flung  across 


382 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


the  mountain-path  like  a  sheer  and  sudden  wall,  and  its  crest, 
sharp  as  if  shaped  with  knives,  reared  up  more  than  twice  the 
height  of  Boromir;  but  through  the  middle  a  passage  had 
been  beaten,  rising  and  falling  like  a  bridge.
Arrows  came  whistling  in,  but  struck  the  northern  wall,  and 
fell  harmlessly  to  the  floor.
For  three  years  after  the  Party  he  had  been  away.
Slow,  because 
they  need  not  count  the  running  years,  not  for  themselves.
He  isn’t  hesitating  about  which  way 
to  go.
Peering  out,  Frodo  saw  that  the  night  was  still  clear.
What  could  not  a  warrior  do  in  this  hour,  a  great  leader?
“The  Elder  Days  are 
gone.
And  it  is 
not  our  part  here  to  take  thought  only  for  a  season,  or  for  a 
few  lives  of  Men,  or  for  a  passing  age  of  the  world.
‘Whoa,  Sam  Gamgee!’  he  said  aloud.
On  a  baldric  he 
wore  a  great  horn  Upped  with  silver  that  now  was  laid  upon 
his  knees.
Raising  himself  on  one  arm  he  looked,  and  saw  now  in  the 
pale  light  that  they  were  in  a  kind  of  passage  which  behind 
them  turned  a  corner.
‘Did  I  hear  you  calling?
There  came  a  cold 
clear  dawn  at  the  end  of  a  long  stumbling  night-march.
But  which  it  is  that  he 
sees,  even  the  wisest  cannot  always  tell.
At  last,  however,  Balin  listened  to  the  whispers, 
and  resolved  to  go;  and  though  Dain  did  not  give  leave  will¬ 
ingly,  he  took  with  him  Ori  and  Oin  and  many  of  our  folk, 
and  they  went  away  south.
Forget  the  nightly  noises!
If  the  danger 
were  not  so  dark,  I  should  dance  for  joy.
‘He  is  the  Bearer,  and  the  fate 
of  the  Burden  is  on  him.
Or  perhaps  to  Bilbo.
He  was  out  of  breath.
In  the  meanwhile  stick  to  your  plan; 
but  be  more  careful  than  ever,  especially  of  the  Ring.
There 
was  a  dead  silence  outside.
‘It  will  have  to  be  paid  for,’  they  said.
Suddenly  to  his 
horror  Sam  found  that  his  master  had  vanished;  and  at  that 
moment  a  black  shadow  rushed  past  him,  and  he  fell.
I  have  not  tasted  it  since 
the  morning  before  the  snowstorm.’ 

The  last  thing  that  Pippin  saw,  as  sleep  took  him,  was  a 
dark  glimpse  of  the  old  wizard  huddled  on  the  floor,  shielding 
a  glowing  chip  in  his  gnarled  hands  between  his  knees.
Home  is  behind,  the  world  ahead, 

And  there  are  many  paths  to  tread 
Through  shadows  to  the  edge  of  night, 

Until  the  stars  are  all  alight.
A  funny 
way  of  honouring  it,  I  can’t  help  thinking.
Frodo  was  restless  and  anxious,  listening  in  vain  for  a  sound 
of  Gandalf.
Merry 
was  standing  there  with  a  candle  in  one  hand,  and  banging 
on  the  door  with  the  other.
As  the  Power  grows,  its  proved  friends 
will  also  grow;  and  the  Wise,  such  as  you  and  I,  may  with 
patience  come  at  last  to  direct  its  courses,  to  control  it.
The  Company 
retreated  to  the  other  side  of  the  chamber.
Where  is  it?’ 

‘In  an  envelope,  if  you  must  know,’  said  Bilbo  impatiently.
But  the  hobbits  came  and  cut  down  hundreds  of  trees,  and 
made  a  great  bonfire  in  the  Forest,  and  burned  all  the  ground 
in  a  long  strip  east  of  the  Hedge.
At  first  they  made  fair  progress, 
but  as  they  went  on,  their  passage  became  slower  and  more 
dangerous.
All 
were  eager  to  get  the  journey  over  as  quickly  as  possible,  and 
were  willing,  tired  as  they  were,  to  go  on  marching  still  for 
several  hours.
His  family  grew  and  grew,  and  after  his  days  con- 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED 


129 


tinued  to  grow,  until  Brandy  Hall  occupied  the  whole  of  the 
low  hill,  and  had  three  large  front-doors,  many  side-doors, 
and  about  a  hundred  windows.
I  think,  I  think  you  are  not  really  as  you  choose 
to  look.
‘Then  you  know  why  I  am 
leaving  the  Shire?’ 

‘I  do  not  know  for  what  reason  the  Enemy  is  pursuing 
you,’  answered  Gildor;  ‘but  I  perceive  that  he  is  -  strange 
indeed  though  that  seems  to  me.
Troll  sat  alone  on  his  seat  of  stone, 

And  munched  and  mumbled  a  bare  old  bone; 

For  many  a  year  he  had  gnawed  it  near, 

For  meat  was  hard  to  come  by.
‘That  animal  can  nearly  talk,’  he  said,  ‘and  would  talk,  if 
he  stayed  here  much  longer.
The  West  wind  was  sighing  in  the  branches.
Sam’s  wound  was  not  deep,  but  it  looked  ugly, 


LOTHLORIEN  437 

and  Aragorn’s  face  was  grave  as  he  examined  it.
Ere  the  shade 
of  night  falls  we  shall  come  to  them.
He  opened  his 
eyes,  and  heard  a  cock  crowing  lustily  in  the  inn-yard.
But  Gandalf  bade  us  hope  still  for  his  cure,  and  we  had  not 
the  heart  to  keep  him  ever  in  dungeons  under  the  earth, 
where  he  would  fall  back  into  his  old  black  thoughts.’ 

‘You  were  less  tender  to  me,’  said  Gloin  with  a  flash  of  his 
eyes,  as  old  memories  were  stirred  of  his  imprisonment  in 
the  deep  places  of  the  Elven-king’s  halls.
But  that  no  longer  troubles  him.
The  man  stared  after  the  hobbits  for  a  moment,  and  then 
he  went  back  to  his  house.
But 
you  have  some  strength  in  you,  my  dear  hobbit!
Suddenly  Frodo  noticed  that  a  strange-looking  weather¬ 
beaten  man,  sitting  in  the  shadows  near  the  wall,  was  also 
listening  intently  to  the  hobbit-talk.
‘Very  odd,’  said  Frodo,  tightening  his  belt,  ‘considering 
that  there  is  actually  a  good  deal  less  of  me.
‘It  would  be 
faithless  now  to  say  farewell.’ 

‘It  would  indeed  be  a  betrayal,  if  we  all  left  him,’  said 
Aragorn.
He  plunged 
off  in  the  direction  of  the  call,  and  found  himself  going  steeply 
uphill.
And  they  are  not  all.
But  Nob,  the  hobbit  servant, 
came  bustling  in  long  before  they  thought  of  ringing.
It  is  as  my  heart  guessed,  Frodo  went  this  way.
Gandalf  held  it  up.
Listen!
Tom  Bombadil 
is  the  Master.
What  do  Legolas  and  the 
little  folk  say?
‘Saruman  has  fallen  under  it.
That  was  the  first  real  warning  I  had 
that  all  was  not  well.
The  door  burst  in  pieces.
‘If  Elves  could  fly  over  mountains,  they  might  fetch  the  Sun 


380  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

to  save  us,’  answered  Gandalf.
I  don’t  suppose  we  shall  see  them  again.’ 

‘Yet  we  may,  Mr.
Next  morning  after  a  late  breakfast,  the  wizard  was  sitting 
with  Frodo  by  the  open  window  of  the  study.
He  saw  the  Mountain  silent  rise 
where  twilight  lies  upon  the  knees 
of  Valinor,  and  Eldamar 
beheld  afar  beyond  the  seas.
It  stepped  forward  slowly  on  to  the 
bridge,  and  suddenly  it  drew  itself  up  to  a  great  height,  and 
its  wings  were  spread  from  wall  to  wall;  but  still  Gandalf 
could  be  seen,  glimmering  in  the  gloom;  he  seemed  small, 
and  altogether  alone:  grey  and  bent,  like  a  wizened  tree  before 
the  onset  of  a  storm.
Before  long,  washed  and  refreshed,  the  hobbits  were  seated 
at  the  table,  two  on  each  side,  while  at  either  end  sat  Gold- 
berry  and  the  Master.
He  is  far  away.
‘Here’s  our  collector  of  infor¬ 
mation!
But  there,  like  as  not  I’ll  only  see  the 
stars,  or  something  that  I  won’t  understand.’ 

‘Like  as  not,’  said  the  Lady  with  a  gentle  laugh.
He  stared  down  into  the  dark,  holding  his 
breath.
It  hasn’t  made  it  any  easier 
in  the  end,  but  it  would  be  a  pity  to  waste  all  my  preparations.
Come!
After  that  the  trees  gave  up 
the  attack,  but  they  became  very  unfriendly.
Frodo,  I’d  say  no\  This  Strider  here, 


STRIDER 


217 


he  warns  and  he  says  take  care;  and  I  say  yes  to  that,  and  let’s 
begin  with  him.
Hatred 
again  stirred  in  him,  but  he  had  no  longer  the  strength  to 
refuse.
‘Do  you  hear  the  voice  of  Nimrodel?’  asked  Legolas.
‘How  do  we  know  you  are  the  Strider 
that  Gandalf  speaks  about?’  he  demanded.
‘But  what  the  word  was  is  not 
remembered.
merry  dol!
‘I  once  knew  every  spell  in  all  the  tongues  of  Elves  or  Men 


400  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

or  Ores,  that  was  ever  used  for  such  a  purpose.
But  Sauron 
of  Mordor  assailed  them,  and  they  made  the  Last  Alliance  of 
Elves  and  Men,  and  the  hosts  of  Gil-galad  and  Elendil  were 
mustered  in  Arnor.
Soon  they  came  into  well-tended  fields  and 
meadows:  there  were  hedges  and  gates  and  dikes  for  drainage.
Nob!’ 

‘Coming,  sir!
The  Watcher  in  the  Water  took  Oin.
‘Elrond  himself 
chose  him  to  be  one  of  our  companions,  and  he  has  been 
brave  and  faithful.’ 

The  Elves  spoke  together  in  soft  voices,  and  questioned 
Legolas  in  their  own  tongue.
I  feel  like  walking.
‘I  wish  I  was  back  there,’  he  said.
Frodo  was  selling  his  beautiful  hole  was  even 
more  debatable  than  the  price.
They  were 
prepared  to  listen  to  anything,  and  to  cheer  at  every  full  stop.
The  two  powers  strove  in  him.
‘The  Shire  -  he  may  be  seeking  for  it  now,  if  he  has  not 
already  found  out  where  it  lies.
‘If  the  return  to  Iarwain  be  thought  too  dangerous, 
then  flight  to  the  Sea  is  now  fraught  with  gravest  peril.
‘It  is  cold 
in  the  tree-tops  in  winter,  though  the  wind  tonight  is  in  the 
South;  but  we  have  food  and  drink  to  give  you  that  will  drive 
away  the  night-chill,  and  we  have  skins  and  cloaks  to  spare.’ 

The  hobbits  accepted  this  second  (and  far  better)  supper 
very  gladly.
Far  away  it  seemed,  and  beautiful:  white -walled, 
many-towered,  proud  and  fair  upon  its  mountain-seat;  its 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  523 

battlements  glittered  with  steel,  and  its  turrets  were  bright  with 
many  banners.
When  they 
returned  to  the  Company  Gandalf  spoke,  and  then  he  knew 
that  it  had  been  decided  to  face  the  weather  and  the  high 
pass.
Everyone  in  the  room  was  now  looking  at  him.
‘Never 
travel  far  without  a  rope!
LOTHLORIEN 


457 


He  turned  and  saw  that  Sam  was  now  standing  beside  him, 
looking  round  with  a  puzzled  expression,  and  rubbing  his 
eyes  as  if  he  was  not  sure  that  he  was  awake.
And  even  if  we  could,  soon  or  late  the  Lord  of  the 
Rings  would  learn  of  its  hiding  place  and  would  bend  all  his 
power  towards  it.
The  sun  that  lay  on  Lothlorien 
had  no  power  to  enlighten  the  shadow  of  that  distant  height.
The 
dark  things  that  were  driven  out  in  the  year  of  the  Dragon’s  fall 
have  returned  in  greater  numbers,  and  Mirkwood  is  again  an 
evil  place,  save  where  our  realm  is  maintained.
Yet  hope  remains  while  all  the 
Company  is  true.’ 

And  with  that  word  she  held  them  with  her  eyes,  and  in 
silence  looked  searchingly  at  each  of  them  in  turn.
I  will  roast  the 
old  fool  over  a  slow  fire.”  He  expected  no  less,  and  when 
he  saw  my  face  he  fell  down  flat  and  began  to  melt  on  the 
spot.’ 

‘What  did  you  do  to  him?’  cried  Frodo  in  alarm.
North  with  the  wind  in  the  left  eye  and  a 
blessing  on  your  footsteps!
When  they  opened  their 
eyes  Bilbo  was  nowhere  to  be  seen.
But  Lobelia  was  not  so  easily 
got  rid  of.
He  saw  that 
Strider  was  sitting  alert  in  his  chair:  his  eyes  gleamed  in  the 
light  of  the  fire,  which  had  been  tended  and  was  burning 
brightly;  but  he  made  no  sign  or  movement.
‘You’d  better  be  hidden,  Mr.
‘So  you  go 
on,’  he  cried.
There  is  no  doubt  that  he  was  tormented, 
and  the  fear  of  Sauron  lies  black  on  his  heart.
He  felt  Sam  looking  at  him,  as  if  he  knew 
that  his  master  was  in  some  great  trouble,  but  he  could  not 
turn  towards  him.
He  had  a  collar  of  silver  in  which  a  single  white  stone  was 
set;  his  locks  were  shorn  about  his  shoulders.
A  wizard 
they  say  he  is,  but  he’s  a  good  friend  of  mine,  whether  or  no.
He  came  to  a  path,  the  dwindling  ruins  of  a  road  of  long  ago.
Ah!
‘It  is  useless  to  sit  here  until  the  snow  goes  over  our 
heads.
We  shall  have  a  Council,  as  soon  as  you  are  well  enough.
‘Believe  not  that  in  the  land  of  Gondor  the  blood  of 
Numenor  is  spent,  nor  all  its  pride  and  dignity  forgotten.
The  wide  stairway  was  sound  and  undamaged.
‘Let’s  go  and  look  for  the  rest  of 
the  party!’ 


294 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘I  can  take  you  to  them,  sir,’  said  Sam.
Such 
is  your  fate.’ 

Frodo  did  not  answer  at  once.
We  fear  that  he  may  yield.
Farewell!’ 

Many  others  of  Elrond’s  household  stood  in  the  shadows 
and  watched  them  go,  bidding  them  farewell  with  soft  voices.
Where  are  you  going?’  asked  Frodo.
They  are  quite  different  from  what  I  expected  - 
so  old  and  young,  and  so  gay  and  sad,  as  it  were.’ 

Frodo  looked  at  Sam  rather  startled,  half  expecting  to  see 
some  outward  sign  of  the  odd  change  that  seemed  to  have 
come  over  him.
He  took  his  own  tea  with  Pippin  and  Sam  Gamgee  in  the 
kitchen.
Half  hopeful  and  half  afraid  of  some  new  danger,  Frodo 
and  Sam  now  both  stood  still.
They  were  the  windows  of  Brandy  Hall,  the  ancient 
home  of  the  Brandybucks.
But  this  is  not  the  time 
for  lessons!’  He  turned  to  Strider.
The  Lady  Arwen  was 
there.’ 

Strider  looked  down  at  Bilbo  gravely.
High  up  above  the  tall  cliffs 
were  steep  slopes  upon  which  trees  climbed,  mounting  one 
head  above  another;  and  above  them  again  were  grey  faces 
of  inaccessible  rock,  crowned  by  a  great  spire  of  stone.
At  that  moment  from  far  off  the  wind  bore  to  their  listening 
ears  the  howling  of  wolves.
‘Here  is  set  G  for  Galadriel,’  she  said;  ‘but  also  it  may 
stand  for  garden  in  your  tongue.
For  you  seem  ever  to  think  only  of  its  power 
in  the  hands  of  the  Enemy:  of  its  evil  uses  not  of  its  good.
Soon  a  shoulder  of  the  hills  cut  off  the  light  of 
the  fast  westering  sun.
But  odd  things  may  happen  to  people  that  have 
such  treasures  -  if  they  use  them.
But  you  have  yet  spoken  only  of  seven.’ 

‘The  eighth  is  a  dwarf,’  said  Legolas.
The  way  to  Minas  Tirith 
lies  upon  this  side,  upon  the  west;  but  the  straight  road  of  the 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN  479 

Quest  lies  east  of  the  River,  upon  the  darker  shore.
As  some  of  you 
know  well,  it  cannot  be  crossed  by  travellers  with  baggage 
between  Lorien  and  Gondor,  save  by  boat.
Warm  now  be  heart  and  limb!
For  she  herself  and 
her  maidens  wove  this  stuff;  and  never  before  have  we  clad 
strangers  in  the  garb  of  our  own  people.’ 

After  their  morning  meal  the  Company  said  farewell  to  the 
lawn  by  the  fountain.
And  what  was  said 
therein  was  already  known.
He  reappeared,  hat  first,  over  the  brow  of  the 
hill,  and  behind  him  came  in  an  obedient  line  six  ponies: 
their  own  five  and  one  more.
In  what  way?’ 

‘In  many  ways,’  answered  the  wizard.
‘A  Balrog,’  muttered  Gandalf.
At  that  point  it  bent  left  and  went  down  into 
the  lowlands  of  the  Yale  making  for  Stock;  but  a  lane 
branched  right,  winding  through  a  wood  of  ancient  oak-trees 
on  its  way  to  Woodhall.
I  have 
never  been  out  of  my  own  land  before.
I 
thought  at  first  that  this  here  Redhorn,  or  whatever  its  name 
is,  might  be  it,  till  Gimli  spoke  his  piece.
‘This  stone  I  gave  to  Celebrian  my  daughter,  and 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


489 


she  to  hers;  and  now  it  comes  to  you  as  a  token  of  hope.
I  have  never  heard  of  him  before.’ 

‘No,  don’t!’  said  Merry  and  Pippin  together,  sitting  sud¬ 
denly  upright.
He  was  smoking  a  short  black  pipe.
‘That  is 
what  I  chiefly  need.’ 

‘Courage  is  found  in  unlikely  places,’  said  Gildor.
‘But  I  expected  to  find  it.
They  thought 
of  the  slanting  light  of  evening  glittering  on  the  Brandywine 
River,  and  the  windows  of  Bucklebury  beginning  to  gleam 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


159 


with  hundreds  of  lights.
There  was  neither 
star  nor  moon.
‘Hush!’  said  Frodo.
Dark¬ 
ness  lay  there  under  the  Sun.
But  I  must  admit,’  he  added  with  a 
queer  laugh,  ‘that  I  hoped  you  would  take  to  me  for  my 
own  sake.
‘I  do  not  know,  but  it  seems  clear  to  me  that  this  is  what 
happened.
He 
was  a  funny  customer  and  asking  funny  questions.
They  started,  and  Sam  drew 
his  sword  and  stood  over  Frodo;  but  Strider  knelt  down 
swiftly  at  his  side.
‘And  what  is  he  doing  in  this  part  of  the  world?’ 

‘There  are  some  Men  about,’  said  Frodo.
‘Well,  let’s  start  then!’  He  stepped  out  of  the  front-door.
On  all  the  others  a  dread  fell  at  the  mention 
of  that  name.
490 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘None,  Lady,’  answered  Gimli.
It  would  be  folly  to  throw 
away:  what?
The  Riders  were  too  swift  to  over¬ 
take,  and  too  many  to  oppose.
There 
are  more  midges  than  water!’ 

‘What  do  they  live  on  when  they  can’t  get  hobbit?’  asked 
Sam,  scratching  his  neck.
From  the  ashes  afire  shall  be  woken, 

A  light  from  the  shadows  shall  spring; 

Renewed  shall  be  blade  that  was  broken: 

The  crownless  again  shall  be  king.
The  old  moon  passed,  and  a  new 
moon  waxed  and  waned  in  the  world  outside,  while  we  tarried 
there.
‘I  think,’  answered  Strider  slowly,  as  if  he  was  not  quite 
sure,  ‘I  think  the  best  thing  is  to  go  as  straight  eastward  from 
here  as  we  can,  to  make  for  the  line  of  hills,  not  for 
Weathertop.
‘As  was  agreed,  I  shall  here  blindfold  the  eyes  of  Gimli  the 
Dwarf.
The  advice  of  Gandalf 
seemed  absurd.
That  is  a  strange  land,  and  is  now  little 
known.
‘She 
must  have  thought  of  something  really  nasty,  and  have  come 
back  again  to  say  it.
‘I  shall  sit  here  quietly  by  the  fire  for  a  bit,  and 
perhaps  go  out  later  for  a  sniff  of  the  air.
There  was  a  splendid  supper  for  everyone;  for 
everyone,  that  is,  except  those  invited  to  the  special  family 
dinner-party.
‘If  room  isn’t  found  for  them,  they’ll  find  it 
for  themselves.
Guided  by  Aragorn  they  struck  a  good  path.
The  sun  went  down.
He  was  glad  to  hear  the  gate  clang  to 
behind  them,  as  they  rode  forward.
It  is  no  good  saying  any  more.
He  seemed  to  be  still 
standing  on  guard  by  the  closed  door.
He  knows  we  shan’t  agree  to  his 
going  east.
I  hope  Butterbur  sends  this  promptly, 
man,  but  his  memory  is  like  a  lumber- 
room:  thing  wanted  always  buried.
Quickly  and  quietly  they  slipped  off  the  path,  and  ran  into 
the  deeper  shade  under  the  oak-trees.
We  of  Minas  Tirith  have  been  staunch  through 
long  years  of  trial.
And  the  music  and 
the  singing  -  not  that  I  have  had  the  time  or  the  heart  for 
much  listening  since  we  got  here.
When  this  was  done  they  turned  to  watch  Gandalf.
I’ll  look  in  again  later.
‘But  there  is  more 
about  you  now  than  appears  on  the  surface.
We  want  to  get  to  Bucklebury  before 
dark.
He  laid 
his  hand  on  the  pony’s  head,  and  spoke  in  a  low  voice.
The  others  had  been  driven  off,  or  had  bolted  in 
terror,  and  were  found  wandering  in  different  corners  of 
the  Bree-land.
Well,  Master  Underhill,’  said  Strider,  ‘if  I  were  you,  I 
should  stop  your  young  friends  from  talking  too  much.
But  these  old  images  here  brought  it 
to  my  mind.’  Standing  up,  with  his  hands  behind  his  back, 
as  if  he  was  at  school,  he  began  to  sing  to  an  old  tune.
Yet  they 
would  not  be  safe.
At  last  he  sat  down  again.
Plainly  Boromir’s  thought 
was  different  from  his  final  words.
I  shall  take  the  right-hand  passage.
‘I  have  it!’  he  cried.
‘Let  me  see  -  it  was  in  the  year  that  the  White 
Council  drove  the  Dark  Power  from  Mirkwood,  just  before 
the  Battle  of  Five  Armies,  that  Bilbo  found  his  ring.
‘Very  well,’  he  said.
Go  on!
‘Though  I  never  heard 
of  any  horse  swimming  the  Brandywine.
We 
are  journeying  east  and  cannot  go  further  tonight.’ 

‘Hobbits!
‘Do  not  be  afraid!’  said  Aragorn.
They  had  explored 
the  small  dell  and  the  surrounding  slopes.
‘I  was 
born  under  the  shadow  of  the  White  Mountains  and  know 
something  of  journeys  in  the  high  places.
‘I  am  flattered,  Lindir,’  he  said.
So 
terrible  was  it  that  Frodo  stood  rooted,  unable  to  cry  out  or 
to  withdraw  his  gaze.
What  can  I  do  now?
‘What’s  that,  Strider?
A  cold  wind  flowed  down  to  meet 
them  from  the  mountains  ahead.
Up  came  Tom  with  his  big  boots  on.
Their  bags  and  gear  they  piled  on  the  parlour-floor.
‘Now  let  us  cry:  “a  plague  on  the  stiff  necks  of  Elves!”’ 
said  Aragorn.
Speak  no  words  to 
them!
But  perhaps  the  delay  will  prove 
useful  -  it  may  have  put  them  off  our  trail.’ 

The  others  looked  at  him.
Now  it  comes  to  it,  I  don’t  like  parting 
with  it  at  all,  I  may  say.
If  Gollum  had  conttived  to 
follow  them,  he  remained  unseen  and  unheard.
‘I 
wish  I  had  never  come  here,  and  I  don’t  want  to  see  no  more 
magic,’  he  said  and  fell  silent.
Often 


170  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

his  voice  would  turn  to  song,  and  he  would  get  out  of  his 
chair  and  dance  about.
As  he  stood  just  beyond  the  opening  they 
saw  his  face  lit  by  a  red  glow.
When  they  had  walked  for  about  three  hours  they  rested.
Besides,  their  cousin,  Bilbo,  had  been  specializing  in 
food  for  many  years  and  his  table  had  a  high  reputation.
How  it  came  to  be  on 
his  finger  he  could  not  tell.
Where  are  you,  Gimli?
Even  if  we  live  to  see  the  dawn,  who 


388 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


now  will  wish  to  journey  south  by  night  with  the  wild  wolves 
on  his  trail?’ 

‘How  far  is  Moria?’  asked  Boromir.
He  said  he  was  thinking  of 
writing  a  book  (at  which  there  was  silent  astonishment),  and 
that  he  and  his  friends  wanted  to  collect  information  about 
hobbits  living  outside  the  Shire,  especially  in  the  eastern 
lands.
An  eastward  bend  led  them  hard  by  the 
sward  of  Mirrormere,  and  there  not  far  from  the  roadside 
stood  a  single  column  broken  at  the  top.
Butterbur.
The  air  grew  warm  and  very  still 
under  the  great  moist  clouds  that  had  floated  up  from  the 
South  and  the  distant  seas.
Their  purpose  was  to  hold  this  course  west  of  the  Mountains 
for  many  miles  and  days.
‘Ride  on!
If  there  are  Ores  there,  it  may  prove  ill  for 
us,  that  is  true.
He  took  all  the  credit 
for  that  to  himself,  and  he  was  very  proud  of  it.
“If  this  delay 
was  his  fault,  I  will  melt  all  the  butter  in  him.
‘Did  I  not  say  to  you:  if  you  pass  the 
doors  of  Moria,  beware ?
He  had  said  something  like 
this  at  the  Council,  but  then  he  had  accepted  the  correction 
of  Elrond.
He  gazed  at  Frodo  and  Bilbo  with  sudden  wonder.
‘Well!’  said  Gandalf  at  last.
The  room  became  dark  and  silent,  though 
the  clack  of  Sam’s  shears,  now  nearer  to  the  windows,  could 
still  be  heard  faintly  from  the  garden.
The  swish  of  the  pony’s  tail  and  the 
occasional  movements  of  his  feet  became  loud  noises.
Nay,  I  did  not 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  165 

hear:  I  was  busy  singing.
And 
you  must  remember  that  nine  years  ago,  when  I  last  saw  you, 
I  still  knew  little  for  certain.’ 

‘But  why  not  destroy  it,  as  you  say  should  have  been  done 
long  ago?’  cried  Frodo  again.
And  I  don’t  reckon  that  these  folk 
can  do  much  more  to  help  us,  magic  or  no.
But  if  he  hated  it, 
why  didn’t  he  get  rid  of  it,  or  go  away  and  leave  it?’ 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


73 


‘You  ought  to  begin  to  understand,  Frodo,  after  all  you 
have  heard,’  said  Gandalf.
“Yes,”  he  said.
‘I  am  at  home  among  trees, 
by  root  or  bough,  though  these  trees  are  of  a  kind  strange  to 
me,  save  as  a  name  in  song.
We  can 
feel  their  presence  -  it  troubled  our  hearts,  as  soon  as  we 
came  here,  and  before  we  saw  them;  they  feel  ours  more 
keenly.
No  black  man  shall  pass 
my  doors,  while  I  can  stand  on  my  legs.
Not 
that  he  has  told  me  a  great  deal,  he  has  become  closer  than 
ever  these  last  few  years.
‘And  look  closely!’ 


66 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


As  Frodo  did  so,  he  now  saw  fine  lines,  finer  than  the  finest 
pen-strokes,  running  along  the  ring,  outside  and  inside:  lines 
of  fire  that  seemed  to  form  the  letters  of  a  flowing  script.
‘He’s  mine,’  said  Tom.
And  in  any  case  that  is  not  their  way.
Look  out  for  me, 
especially  at  unlikely  times!
White  mists  began  to  rise  and  curl  on  the  surface 
of  the  river  and  stray  about  the  roots  of  the  trees  upon  its 
borders.
Gandalf  remained  for  a  while  staring  after  him  into  the 
darkness.
But  I  will  now 
tell  the  true  story,  and  if  some  here  have  heard  me  tell  it 
otherwise’  -  he  looked  sidelong  at  Gloin  -  ‘I  ask  them  to 
forget  it  and  forgive  me.
But  now 
Frodo  often  met  strange  dwarves  of  far  countries,  seeking 
refuge  in  the  West.
He 
thought  he  could  hear  cries  and  calls  from  the  woods  near 
the  shore  below.
‘It  is  rash  to  be  too  sure,  yet  I  think  that  we  may 
hope  now  that  the  Ringwraiths  were  scattered,  and  have  been 
obliged  to  return  as  best  they  could  to  their  Master  in  Mordor, 
empty  and  shapeless.
But  it  was  not  a  tale  that  any  hobbit  liked  to 
listen  to,  even  by  a  comfortable  fireside  far  away.
For  Sunday*  there’s  a  special  pair, 

And  these  they  polish  up  with  care 
on  Saturday  afternoons.
Some  of  these  were  only  very 
distantly  connected  with  Bilbo,  and  some  had  hardly  ever 
been  in  Hobbiton  before,  as  they  lived  in  remote  corners  of 
the  Shire.
There  are  some  among  you  who  can  handle  boats: 
Legolas,  whose  folk  know  the  swift  Forest  River;  and  Boromir 
of  Gondor;  and  Aragorn  the  traveller.’ 

‘And  one  Hobbit!’  cried  Merry.
However,  in  the  meanwhile,  walking  was  not  unpleasant.
He  knew  that  it  had  become 
aware  of  his  gaze.
The  next  day  the  hills  rose  still  higher  and 
steeper  before  them,  and  they  were  forced  to  turn  away  north¬ 
wards  out  of  their  course.
Only  he  does 
not  altogether  like  mysterious  vagabonds  of  my  sort.’  Frodo 
gave  him  a  puzzled  look.
That  is  a  wide 
region  of  sluggish  fen  where  the  stream  becomes  tortuous 
and  much  divided.
In  this  way 
they  covered  almost  twenty  miles  before  nightfall,  and  came 
to  a  point  where  the  Road  bent  right  and  ran  down  towards 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


277 


the  bottom  of  the  valley,  now  making  straight  for  the  Bruinen.
Your  own  way  you  alone  can  choose.
But  at  last  I  can  carry  on  the  story,  I  think.
I  will  take  neither.
They  were  depressed.
Suddenly  they  came  out  of  the  shadow 
of  the  trees,  and  before  them  lay  a  wide  space  of  grass, 
grey  under  the  night.
The  flames  roared  up  to  greet  it,  and  wreathed  about 
it;  and  a  black  smoke  swirled  in  the  air.
We  have  been  keeping  watch  on  the 
rivers,  ever  since  we  saw  a  great  troop  of  Ores  going  north 
towards  Moria,  along  the  skirts  of  the  mountains,  many  days 
ago.
When  he  had  left  Hobbiton  he  had  wandered  off  aimlessly, 
along  the  Road  or  in  the  country  on  either  side;  but  somehow 
he  had  steered  all  the  time  towards  Rivendell.
I  will  take  Sam  to  visit  the  Elves;  he 
will  be  delighted.’  He  spoke  lightly;  but  his  heart  was  moved 
suddenly  with  a  desire  to  see  the  house  of  Elrond  Halfelven, 
and  breathe  the  air  of  that  deep  valley  where  many  of  the 
Fair  Folk  still  dwelt  in  peace.
If  any 
of  you  had  thought  of  returning  northwards  to  your  homes, 
you  would  not  have  been  able  to  pass  that  way.
I  was  in  an  evil  plight.
All  I  knew  was  that  you  might  be 
found  in  a  wild  region  with  the  uncouth  name  of  Shire.” 

‘  “Your  information  was  correct,”  I  said.
A  ridiculous  story.
I’ll  not  deny  that 
I’ll  be  glad  now  when  I  do.’  He  lit  his  lanterns,  and  got  up.
For  instance,  he  called  the  Ring  his  “birthday-present”,  and 
he  stuck  to  that.
But  at  that  moment  several  things  happened.
This  was  the  song  as  Frodo  heard  it: 


104  THE  fellowship  of  the  ring 

Snow-white!
Couldn’t  you  take 
me  to  see  Elves,  sir,  when  you  go?’ 

Suddenly  Gandalf  laughed.
Keep  it,  Aragorn,  till  we 
reach  the  house  of  Elrond!
You  must  lay 
aside  much  of  the  stuff  that  we  brought  against  bitter  weather: 
you  will  not  need  it  inside,  nor,  I  hope,  when  we  come 
through  and  journey  on  down  into  the  South.
I  see  now  little  hope, 
if  we  do  not  soon  vanish  from  sight  for  a  while,  and  cover 
our  trail.
‘Do  you 
know  any  more  of  that  old  lay  that  you  spoke  of?’ 

‘I  do  indeed,’  answered  Strider.
The  marshes  were  bewildering  and  treacherous, 
and  there  was  no  permanent  trail  even  for  Rangers  to  find 
through  their  shifting  quagmires.
‘Well,  see  you  later  -  the  day  after  tomorrow,  if  you 
don’t  go  to  sleep  on  the  way!’ 

Folco  went  home  after  lunch,  but  Pippin  remained  behind.
Frodo,  who 
was  not  walking,  had  time  to  gaze  ahead  and  to  think.
‘Put  it  out!
He  had  much  to  say  about  the  shortcomings  of  the  new 
owners  of  Bag  End.
The  largest  and 
most  ferocious  of  the  three  halted  in  front  of  Frodo,  bristling 
and  growling.
‘Do  not  move  or 
speak!’ 

There  was  a  sound  of  soft  laughter  over  their  heads,  and 
then  another  clear  voice  spoke  in  an  elven-tongue.
‘I  will  not  walk  blindfold, 
like  a  beggar  or  a  prisoner.
‘The  four  hobbits  shall  climb  up  here  and  stay  with  us  - 
we  do  not  fear  them!
Silly  old 
fool.
Or,  if  they  are  wise,  why  should  they  expect  to 
know  it,  until  the  hour  has  struck?
He  capered 
about  on  the  table;  and  when  he  came  a  second  time  to  the 
cow  jumped  over  the  Moon ,  he  leaped  in  the  air.
In  any 
case  you  might  have  noticed  that  one  of  them  has  an  old 
bird’s  nest  behind  his  ear.
He  felt  too 
weak  to  stand.
Suddenly  he  stopped.
‘Well,  here  we  are  at  last!’  said  Gandalf.
And  yet  what 
help  could  he  or  any  of  the  Company  give  to  Frodo,  save  to 
walk  blindly  with  him  into  the  darkness?
Dwarves’  tongues  run  on  when  speaking  of 
their  handiwork,  they  say.’ 

And  with  that  Gloin  embarked  on  a  long  account  of  the 
doings  of  the  Dwarf-kingdom.
What  pestilence 


496 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


or  war  or  evil  deed  of  the  Enemy  had  so  blasted  all  that  region 
even  Aragorn  could  not  tell.
‘Or  perhaps, 
yes.
The  path 
that  had  brought  them  to  the  hill  reappeared  on  the  north¬ 
ward  side;  but  they  had  not  followed  it  far  before  they  became 
aware  that  it  was  bending  steadily  to  the  right.
It  was  Gandalf  who  roused  them  all  from  sleep.
I  am  Mr.
I  have  known  few  hobbits,  save  Bilbo 
here;  and  it  seems  to  me  that  he  is  perhaps  not  so  alone  and 
singular  as  I  had  thought  him.
Frodo  felt  a  fool.
He  started.
Rounding  the  corner  they  saw  before 
them  a  low  cliff,  some  five  fathoms  high,  with  a  broken  and 
jagged  top.
It  was  sharp  with  suspicion  and  annoy¬ 
ance.
For  there  was  a  great  commotion  as  soon  as  the 
remaining  guests  were  astir  and  heard  news  of  the  raid  on 
the  inn.
A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


389 


Gandalf  stood  up  and  strode  forward,  holding  his  staff 
aloft.
But  tell  me,  what  would  you  do  with  such  a  gift?’ 

‘Treasure  it,  Lady,’  he  answered,  ‘in  memory  of  your 
words  to  me  at  our  first  meeting.
The  Man  in  the  Moon  was  drinking  deep, 
and  the  cat  began  to  wail; 

A  dish  and  a  spoon  on  the  table  danced, 

The  cow  in  the  garden  madly  pranced, 
and  the  little  dog  chased  his  tail.
Baggins  was 
generous  with  his  money,  most  people  were  willing  to  for¬ 
give  him  his  oddities  and  his  good  fortune.
As 
soon  as  may  be.
We 
might  as  well  have  blown  a  horn  to  announce  our  departure.
A 
few  melancholy  birds  were  piping  and  wailing,  until  the  round 
red  sun  sank  slowly  into  the  western  shadows;  then  an  empty 
silence  fell.
But  it  isn’t.
But 
why  could  we  all  see  their  horses?’ 

‘Because  they  are  real  horses;  just  as  the  black  robes  are 
real  robes  that  they  wear  to  give  shape  to  their  nothingness 
when  they  have  dealings  with  the  living.’ 

‘Then  why  do  these  black  horses  endure  such  riders?
Don’t  go  getting  mixed  up  in  the  business 
of  your  betters,  or  you’ll  land  in  trouble  too  big  for  you,  I  says  to 
him.
Frodo,’  said  Sam.
How  much  is  left 
of  Bilbo’s  share,  I  wonder,  Frodo?’ 

Frodo  looked  at  the  stone,  and  wished  that  Bilbo  had 
brought  home  no  treasure  more  perilous,  nor  less  easy  to  part 
with.
A  golden  afternoon 
of  late  sunshine  lay  warm  and  drowsy  upon  the  hidden  land 
between.
One  Ring  to  find,  them, 

One  Ring  to  bring  them  all  and  in  the  darkness  bind  them.
The  sun  was 
shining;  the  clouds  were  white  and  high.
Make  your 
ways  to  places  where  you  can  find  grass,  and  so  come  in  time 
to  Elrond’s  house,  or  wherever  you  wish  to  go.
‘Can’t  you  hear  their  voices?’ 

‘Yes,  they  are  Elves,’  said  Legolas;  ‘and  they  say  that  you 
breathe  so  loud  that  they  could  shoot  you  in  the  dark.’  Sam 
hastily  put  his  hand  over  his  mouth.
He 
wondered  if  he  would  remain  maimed  for  life,  and  how  they 


260 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


would  now  manage  to  continue  their  journey.
Her  mantle  glinted  in  the  moon, 

As  on  a  hill-top  high  and  far 
She  danced,  and  at  her  feet  was  strewn 
A  mist  of  silver  quivering.
‘That  won’t  mend  matters.
To  walk 
into  peril  -  to  Mordor.
‘He  went 
up  the  lane  towards  the  causeway  not  a  long  while  back.
‘I  am  afraid 
he  is  out.
If  we  turn 
left  and  follow  it,  we  shall  be  bound  to  come  out  on  the  east 
side  of  the  Forest  eventually.’ 

‘I  dare  say!’  said  Pippin.
Before  he  could  mind,  Tom  slipped  behind 
And  gave  him  the  boot  to  larn  him.
Had  Bilbo  known?
Merry  turned  towards  him  to  say  something  and  gave  a 
start,  and  checked  an  exclamation.
He 
knows  where  Gollum  found  his  ring.
He  missed 
it  by  a  yard.
But  come!
It  foamed  about  his  feet.
They  huddled  together  with  their  backs  to  the  wall.
You  may  learn  something,  and  whether 
what  you  see  be  fair  or  evil,  that  may  be  profitable,  and  yet 
it  may  not.
They  now  kept  a  stone’s  throw  to 
the  left  of  the  road,  and  kept  out  of  sight  of  it  as  much  as 
they  could.
He  lifted  his  eyes  across 
the  river  and  all  the  light  went  out,  and  he  was  back  again  in 
the  world  he  knew.
‘You  won’t  cut 
straight  on  foot  anywhere  in  this  country.’ 

‘We  can  cut  straighter  than  the  road  anyway,’  answered 
Frodo.
But  Mortals  have  not  been 
our  study.
‘I  will,’  said  Aragorn  heavily.
He  is 
thin  and  tough  still.
Nothing  happened.
It  was  silent  and 
windless;  the  grey  east  wind  had  passed  away.
Chapter  12 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


When  Frodo  came  to  himself  he  was  still  clutching  the  Ring 
desperately.
Fire  is  our  friend  in  the  wilderness.’ 

‘Maybe,’  muttered  Sam.
He  is  not  far  away.
Why  did  he  press  us  to  join  the  company?
‘In  the  morning  you 
must  depart,  for  now  we  have  chosen,  and  the  tides  of  fate 
are  flowing.’ 

‘I  would  ask  one  thing  before  we  go,’  said  Frodo,  ‘a  thing 
which  I  often  meant  to  ask  Gandalf  in  Rivendell.
After  all  his  father  was 
a  Baggins.
But  not 
far,  I  fear.
He  felt  the  quick  heave  and  surge  as  the  horse  left  the  river 
and  struggled  up  the  stony  path.
I  won’t  let  you  go.
Why  shouldn’t  it  stay 
there?’ 

Gandalf  looked  again  very  hard  at  Bilbo,  and  there  was  a 
gleam  in  his  eyes.
‘If  a  man 
must  needs  walk  in  sight  of  the  Black  Gate,  or  tread  the 
deadly  flowers  of  Morgul  Vale,  then  perils  he  will  have.
‘These  boats  are 
light-built,  and  they  are  crafty  and  unlike  the  boats  of  other 
folic.
But  you  are  young  and  I  am  old.
Someone  else  always  has  to  carry  on  the  story.
They  hastened  up  the  last  slope,  and  stood  breathless 
beside  her.
Tinbone!
Chapter  9 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY 


Bree  was  the  chief  village  of  the  Bree-land,  a  small  inhabited 
region,  like  an  island  in  the  empty  lands  round  about.
no!’  cried  Frodo.
‘You 
may  be  sure  that  it  was  not  for  any  merit  that  others  do  not 
possess:  not  for  power  or  wisdom,  at  any  rate.
There  are 
no  folk  like  hobbits  after  all  for  a  real  good  talk.
These  tree-roots  would  do  them  good.’ 
He  stretched.
Behind  its  deep  curtain  the  Forest  was  com¬ 
pletely  veiled.
But  it  is  difficult  to  do  both,’  he  objected.
‘He  came  to  offer 
me  his  help.’ 

‘Well,  you  know  your  own  business,  maybe,’  said  Mr.
Mark  my  words,  my  friends:  Tom  was  here  before  the  river 
and  the  trees;  Tom  remembers  the  first  raindrop  and  the  first 
acorn.
Frodo  could  see  it  from  his  window, 
deep  in  the  heavens,  burning  like  a  watchful  eye  that  glared 
above  the  trees  on  the  brink  of  the  valley.
They  passed  along  the  edge  of  a  huge  turnip-field,  and 
came  to  a  stout  gate.
But  don’t  stand  here!
It  will  interest  him,  though  it  will  grieve 
him  deeply.
At  last  Frodo  asked  the  question  that  was  nearest  to 
his  heart: 

‘Tell  me,  Gildor,  have  you  ever  seen  Bilbo  since  he  left  us?’ 

Gildor  smiled.
‘Gollum?
Could  it  have  been  Gandalf?
I 
tried  long  ago;  but  I  have  managed  it  at  last.’ 

‘Then  what  happened  after  Bilbo  escaped  from  him?
up  from  east  up  the  Silverlode.
You  cannot  cross  the  rivers  again,  and  behind 
you  there  are  now  secret  sentinels  that  you  cannot  pass.
The  hand  of  Isildur  alone.
He  looked  towards  the  hobbits.
He 
did  not  forget  the  Barrow,  nor  the  message  of  Gandalf; 
but  something  seemed  to  be  compelling  him  to  disregard 
all  warnings,  and  he  longed  to  yield.
‘What  it  was  I  cannot  guess,  but  I  have  never  felt  such  a 
challenge.
After  all,  you  must  remember 
that  we  know  you  well,  and  are  often  with  you.
I  hate  leaving  them,  and  like  this 
without  any  explanation.
Near  at  hand  was  a  flower-garden  and  a 
clipped  hedge  silver-netted,  and  beyond  that  grey  shaven 
grass  pale  with  dew-drops.
He  won’t  cross  my  land  without  leave  a  second 
time,  not  if  I  can  stop  it.’ 

‘What  fellow  do  you  mean?’  asked  Pippin.
‘Come  with  me,  Sam!’  he  said.
Here  is  something:  a  large  bold  hand  using  an  Elvish  script.’ 

‘That  would  be  Ori’s  hand,’  said  Gimli,  looking  over  the 
wizard’s  arm.
‘Not  yet!’  said  Gandalf.
With  Pity.’ 

‘I  am  sorry,’  said  Frodo.
The  ground 


146  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

was  rising  steadily,  and  as  they  went  forward  it  seemed  that 
the  trees  became  taller,  darker,  and  thicker.
‘Against  delay.
Not  all  the  birds  are  to  be 
trusted,  and  there  are  other  spies  more  evil  than  they  are.’ 

The  hobbits  looked  anxiously  at  the  distant  hills.
Legolas  went  with  them,  for  this  was  to  be  their  last 
night  in  Lothlorien,  and  in  spite  of  the  words  of  Galadriel 
they  wished  to  take  counsel  together.
Well,  I  call  that  very  queer,  and  indeed  disturbing,’  said 
Frodo  to  himself,  as  he  walked  towards  his  companions.
The  winds  of  wrath  came  driving  him, 
and  blindly  in  the  foam  he  fled 
from  west  to  east,  and  errandless, 
unheralded  he  homeward  sped.
Frodo  felt  a  sudden  chill 
running  through  him  and  clutching  at  his  heart;  there  was  a 


THE  GREAT  RIVER  505 

deadly  cold,  like  the  memory  of  an  old  wound,  in  his  shoulder.
But  why?
‘But  I  have  only 
had  one  rapid  glance,  and  that  was  difficult  to  get.
In  a  moment  he  was  out  again,  wiping  his  hands  on 
his  apron.
But  I  wish 


*  The  Hobbits’  name  for  the  Plough  or  Great  Bear.
A  little  below 
him  to  the  left  the  road  ran  down  steeply  into  a  hollow  and 
disappeared.
But  Tom  had  an  errand 
there,  that  he  dared  not  hinder.’  Tom  nodded  as  if  sleep  was 
taking  him  again;  but  he  went  on  in  a  soft  singing  voice: 

I  had  an  errand  there:  gathering  water-lilies, 
green  leaves  and  lilies  white  to  please  my  pretty  lady, 
the  last  ere  the  year’s  end  to  keep  them  from  the  winter, 
to  flower  by  her  pretty  feet  till  the  snows  are  melted.
There  was  no 
other  sound  of  pursuit,  neither  tramp  of  feet,  nor  any  voice.
Let  the  Ring  be  your  weapon, 
if  it  has  such  power  as  you  say.
But  we  are  not  through 
yet,  and  it  is  a  long  way  down  to  the  Gates  that  open  on  the 
world.’ 

The  Company  spent  that  night  in  the  great  cavernous  hall, 
huddled  close  together  in  a  corner  to  escape  the  draught: 
there  seemed  to  be  a  steady  inflow  of  chill  air  through  the 
eastern  archway.
To  Frodo’s  great  joy  the  hobbits  stirred,  stretched  their 
arms,  rubbed  their  eyes,  and  then  suddenly  sprang  up.
Frodo,  nor  to  Mr.
’ 

‘You  are  very  mysterious!
Frodo,’  Maggot  went  on,  ‘I’m  glad  that  you’ve 
had  the  sense  to  come  back  to  Buckland.
“There  are  no  Bagginses  here.
‘The  Ring!
Let’s  get  hold  of  Nob!’ 


234 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


In  the  end  there  was  more  than  three  hours’  delay.
‘But  our  visit  to  this 
room  has  not  been  in  vain.
In  the  mid-morning  the  clouds 
drew  down  lower,  and  it  began  to  rain  heavily.
I  must  consider  this  message  and  what  it  means  under 
its  fair  cloak.” 

‘  “Consider  well,  but  not  too  long,”  said  he.
Long  was  the  way  that  fate  them  bore, 

O’er  stony  mountains  cold  and  grey, 

Through  halls  of  iron  and  darkling  door.
They  trudged  along  as 
fast  as  they  could,  over  patches  of  grass,  and  through  thick 
drifts  of  old  leaves;  and  all  about  them  the  rain  pattered  and 
trickled.
He  never 
left  the  book  about.
’ 


438 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


There  was  a  dark  and  blackened  bruise  on  Frodo’s  right 
side  and  breast.
Merry  and 
Pippin  were  already  asleep,  and  Sam  was  nodding.
But,  of  course, 
Buckland  cannot  resist  a  determined  attack  for  long.
In  a 
short  while  fourteen  sat  down  to  eat.
And  I  would  ask  this  also.
Both  you  and  Bilbo  are  wanted.’ 

Frodo  and  Bilbo  followed  the  wizard  quickly  along  the 
winding  path  back  to  the  house;  behind  them,  uninvited  and 
for  the  moment  forgotten,  trotted  Sam.
If  it  is  so, 
the  boldest  should  pardon  you.
‘It  was  well 
for  us  that  the  pool  had  sunk  a  little,  and  that  the  Watcher 
was  sleeping  down  at  the  southern  end.’ 

Gandalf  raised  his  head  and  looked  round.
As  there  was  now  no  other  possible  course  for  them  to  take, 
they  climbed  down  the  bank,  and  turning  left  went  off  as  fast 
as  they  could.
‘Against  the  Shadow  in  the  East,’  said  Strider  quietly.
I  passed  through, 
and  I  came  out  again  alive!’ 

‘I  too  once  passed  the  Dimrill  Gate,’  said  Aragorn  quietly; 
‘but  though  I  also  came  out  again,  the  memory  is  very  evil.
Hey  now!
When  Frodo  came  at  last  up  on  to  the  flet  he  found  Legolas 
seated  with  three  other  Elves.
But  you 
can’t  come  like  this  without  your  gear  or  food  or  anything.’ 

‘Just  hold  on  a  moment,  and  I’ll  get  my  stuff!’  cried  Sam 
eagerly.
‘I  heard  a  deal  that 
I  didn’t  rightly  understand,  about  an  enemy,  and  rings,  and 


84 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Mr.
‘  “This  I  will  have  as  weregild  for  my  father,  and  my 
brother,”  he  said;  and  therefore  whether  we  would  or  no,  he 
took  it  to  treasure  it.
‘But  I  do  so 
now.
208 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


And  O!
Frodo.
He 
sat  up,  and  felt  the  soft  pillows  yield  to  his  hands,  and  he  lay 
down  again  relieved.
‘At  a  bargain  price,’  said 
others,  ‘and  that’s  more  likely  when  Mistress  Lobelia’s  the 
buyer.’  (Otho  had  died  some  years  before,  at  the  ripe  but 
disappointed  age  of  102.) 

Just  why  Mr.
One  day,  perhaps,  I  will  tell  you 
all  the  tale,  or  you  shall  hear  it  told  in  full  by  one  who  knows 
it  best.
Would  any  of  you  have  believed  me  till  now?’ 
said  Sttider.
‘There’s  more  stored  in  your 
head  than  you  let  on  about.’ 


270 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘I  don’t  know  about  that,’  said  Sam.
Chapter  io 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP 


Aragorn  led  them  to  the  right  arm  of  the  River.
They  had  been  jogging  along  again  for  an  hour 
or  more  when  Sam  stopped  a  moment  as  if  listening.
And  my  heart  too  is  heavy.
Boromir  had  lifted  him  off  the  ground 
out  of  a  nest  of  snow.
When  he 
had  gone  and  passed  again  into  the  outer  world,  still  Frodo 
the  wanderer  from  the  Shire  would  walk  there,  upon  the  grass 
among  elanor  and  niphredil  in  fair  Lothlorien.
I  am  flying  from 
deadly  peril  into  deadly  peril.’ 

‘Of  course  we  understand,’  said  Merry  firmly.
At  this  point  it  ran  nearly  from  South-west  to 
North-east,  and  on  their  right  it  fell  quickly  down  into  a  wide 
hollow.
All  along  it  for  many  leagues 
east  of  the  Bridge  there  are  trees  growing.
Peace  and  freedom,  do 
you  say?
You’ll  have  friends  in  these  parts.
And  those  who  know  me  will  agree 
that  I  have  seldom  been  in  such  need,  and  do  not  bear  such 
misfortune  well.
Whatever  may  be  in  store  for  old  Gandalf,  I’ll  wager 
it  isn’t  a  wolf’s  belly.’ 

For  their  defence  in  the  night  the  Company  climbed  to  the 
top  of  the  small  hill  under  which  they  had  been  sheltering.
Also,’  he  added,  and  his  voice  sank  to  a  whisper,  ‘the 
Ring  draws  them.’ 

‘Is  there  no  escape  then?’  said  Frodo,  looking  round  wildly.
Then  he 
went  in.
No,  not  though  he  possessed 
the  Ring  so  long,  almost  as  far  back  as  he  can  remember.
Here  I  am!
‘Is  there  no  other  way?’  he  said.
Glamdring  glittered  white  in  answer.
‘An  evil  of  the  Ancient  World  it 
seemed,  such  as  I  have  never  seen  before,’  said  Aragorn.
There  were, 
however,  dwarves  on  the  road  in  unusual  numbers.
‘Very  ridiculous  of  you,  Frodo!
He  said  that  it  was  “growing  on  his 
mind”,  and  he  was  always  worrying  about  it;  but  he  did  not 
suspect  that  the  ring  itself  was  to  blame.
It  may  have  other  powers  than  just 
making  you  vanish  when  you  wish  to.’ 

‘I  don’t  understand,’  said  Frodo.
‘The  only  hurt  that  it  did  to  his 
enemy,  I  fear;  for  it  is  unharmed,  but  all  blades  perish  that 
pierce  that  dreadful  King.
Frodo  wandered  round  the  familiar  rooms,  and 
saw  the  light  of  the  sunset  fade  on  the  walls,  and  shadows 
creep  out  of  the  corners.
‘The  first  clear  word  is  sorrow,  but  the  rest  of  the 
line  is  lost,  unless  it  ends  in  estre.
His  enemies  laughed  at  him  with  a  harsh  and 
chilling  laughter.
Two  of  Maggot’s  sons  and  his 
three  daughters  came  in,  and  a  generous  supper  was  laid  on 
the  large  table.
Maybe  there  is 
some  that  want  to  know  what  has  become  of  the  gold  and 
jewels  that  he  buried  in  the  hill  of  Hobbiton,  as  I  hear?’ 


124 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Frodo  said  nothing:  the  shrewd  guesses  of  the  farmer  were 
rather  disconcerting.
At  last  she  spoke 
again.
There  is  still  a 
wide  bare  space  not  far  inside  where  the  bonfire  was  made.’ 

‘Is  it  only  the  trees  that  are  dangerous?’  asked  Pippin.
Someone  said  that 
intelligence  would  be  needed  in  the  party.
‘I  cannot  pass  without 
turning  aside  for  a  moment  to  look  at  the  wonder  of  the  dale!’ 

‘Be  swift  then!’  said  Aragorn,  looking  back  towards  the 
Gates.
‘Where’s  old  Barley?’ 
they  cried.
It  is  half  past 
four  and  very  foggy.
A  sign  that  the  ring  was  getting  control.’ 

‘How  long  have  you  known  all  this?’  asked  Frodo  again.
Even  if  your  Quest  did  not  concern  us  closely,  you 
should  have  refuge  in  this  City,  until  you  were  healed  and 
refreshed.
But  first 
Nob  and  I  will  fetch  your  luggage.’ 

While  Strider  was  gone,  Frodo  gave  Merry  a  rapid  account 
of  all  that  had  happened  since  supper.
There  is  hope  that 
way.
It  was  also 
clear  that  Tom  had  dealings  with  the  Elves,  and  it  seemed 
that  in  some  fashion,  news  had  reached  him  from  Gildor 
concerning  the  flight  of  Frodo.
The 
widest  was  more  than  seven  feet  across,  and  it  was  long 
before  Pippin  could  summon  enough  courage  to  leap  over 


406  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

the  dreadful  gap.
On  the  rocks  of 
the  rapids  below  it  searchers  discovered  the  bodies  of  five 
more,  and  also  a  long  black  cloak,  slashed  and  tattered.
‘I  should  like  to  save  the  Shire,  if  I  could  -  though  there 
have  been  times  when  I  thought  the  inhabitants  too  stupid 
and  dull  for  words,  and  have  felt  that  an  earthquake  or  an 
invasion  of  dragons  might  be  good  for  them.
They 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


233 


might  as  well  set  out  for  the  Moon.
‘A  song!
None  save 
Legolas  and  Aragorn  could  long  endure  her  glance.
For  themselves  they  may  be  right.
‘My  dear  Frodo,  that  is 
just  what  the  Rangers  are:  the  last  remnant  in  the  North  of 
the  great  people,  the  Men  of  the  West.
On  either  side 
ahead  a  darkness  began  to  loom  through  the  mist;  and  he 
guessed  that  they  were  at  last  approaching  the  gap  in  the 
hills,  the  north-gate  of  the  Barrow-downs.
Rumil,  who  had  remained  on  the  other  side, 
drew  back  the  last  one,  slung  it  on  his  shoulder,  and  with  a 
wave  of  his  hand  went  away,  back  to  Nimrodel  to  keep  watch.
‘But  never  mind  about 
looks.
Frodo,  that’s  hard!’  said  Sam  shivering.
He  felt  a  compelling  desire  for  cool  water.
This  is  merrymaking  not  business.
There  in  the  last  end  of  Egladil 
upon  the  green  grass  the  parting  feast  was  held;  but  Frodo 
ate  and  drank  little,  heeding  only  the  beauty  of  the  Lady  and 
her  voice.
If  you  want  anything,  ring  the 
hand-bell,  and  Nob  will  come.
Even  the  leaves  were  silent, 
and  the  very  falls  seemed  to  be  hushed.
Strider?’  he  asked 
impatiently.
For  one  thing,  the  tale  he  told  of  his  loss  agreed  with 
that  which  Bilbo  has  now  told  openly  for  the  first  time;  but 
that  mattered  little,  since  I  had  already  guessed  it.
It  had  slipped  from 
Isildur’s  hand  and  betrayed  him;  then  when  a  chance  came 
it  caught  poor  Deagol,  and  he  was  murdered;  and  after  that 
Gollum,  and  it  had  devoured  him.
‘I  endured  him  as  long  as  I  could,  but  the  truth  was  desper¬ 
ately  important,  and  in  the  end  I  had  to  be  harsh.
Who  of  all  the  Wise  could  have 
foreseen  it?
The  Ring!
Soon  the  white  form  of  the  Lady  was 
small  and  distant.
‘Morning,  my  little  friends!’  he  said  to  the  others.
Boromir  flung  him¬ 
self  against  the  door  and  heaved  it  to;  then  he  wedged  it  with 
broken  sword-blades  and  splinters  of  wood.
A  Barrow-wight  had  taken  him,  and  he  was  probably 
already  under  the  dreadful  spells  of  the  Barrow-wights  about 
which  whispered  tales  spoke.
The  light  of  the  lanterns  fell  on  his  beaming  face;  the 


38 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


golden  buttons  shone  on  his  embroidered  silk  waistcoat.
Over  all  the  sky  was 
blue,  and  the  sun  of  afternoon  glowed  upon  the  hill  and  cast 
long  green  shadows  beneath  the  trees.
Maggot  looked  at  him  thoughtfully.
The  pungent  fragrance  filled  the 
dell,  and  all  those  who  stooped  over  the  steaming  water  felt 
refreshed  and  strengthened.
He  might  have  arrived,  while  they  were  delayed  in  the  Forest 
and  the  Downs.
‘There’s 
earth  under  his  old  feet,  and  clay  on  his  fingers;  wisdom  in 
his  bones,  and  both  his  eyes  are  open,’  said  Tom.
We  must  do  something  to  delay  the  enemy  first.
But  I  have  not 
yet  thought  how  we  shall  cross  that  water.
For  the  moment  it  suffices  to  know  that  the  Ring  passed 
to  Frodo,  your  heir.
We  know  most  of  what  Gandalf  has  told  you.
But  what  would 
you?
No 
fireworks  like  poor  old  Gandalf  used  to  show.
When  I  was  sent  out  as  a  messenger, 
I  passed  through  the  Gap  by  the  skirts  of  the  White  Moun¬ 
tains,  and  crossed  the  Isen  and  the  Greyflood  into  Norther- 
land.
‘It  is  mending  fast.
But  such  falls  and  betrayals,  alas,  have  happened  before.
But  before  they  could  say  anything,  she  sprang  lightly 
up  and  over  the  lily-bowls,  and  ran  laughing  towards  them; 
and  as  she  ran  her  gown  rustled  softly  like  the  wind  in  the 
flowering  borders  of  a  river.
And  since  you  come  with 
an  Elf  of  our  kindred,  we  are  willing  to  befriend  you,  as  Elrond 
asked;  though  it  is  not  our  custom  to  lead  strangers  through 
our  land.
She  seemed  no  longer  perilous  or  terrible,  nor  filled 
with  hidden  power.
A  sudden  dread  fell  on  the 
Company.
Butterbur  had  come  trotting  in,  and  he  was  now  trying  to 
listen  to  several  conflicting  accounts  of  the  event  at  the  same 
time.
This  Ring  has  already  passed  through  it  unscathed,  and 
even  unheated.
It  was 
now  Frodo’s  turn  to  feel  pleased  with  himself.
‘Sun  won’t  show  her  face  much  today,  I’m  thinking.
But  in  the  circle  of  Isengard,  trapped  and  alone,  it 
was  not  easy  to  think  that  the  hunters  before  whom  all  have 
fled  or  fallen  would  falter  in  the  Shire  far  away.’ 

‘I  saw  you!’  cried  Frodo.
Its  face  was  still  and 
unruffled.
‘The  two  or  three 
riding-ponies  that  there  were  in  Bree  were  stabled  in  my  yard, 
and  they’re  gone.
You  shall  watch;  but  only  if  you  promise  to  wake  me  half-way 
towards  morning,  if  nothing  happens  before  then.’ 

In  the  dead  hours  Frodo  came  out  of  a  deep  dark  sleep  to 
find  Sam  shaking  him.
“He  is 
coming.
At  the  same  time  he  struck  at  the  feet  of  his  enemy.
What  power  still  remains  lies  with  us,  here  in  Imladris,  or 
with  Cirdan  at  the  Havens,  or  in  Lorien.
The  next  day  the  country  on  either  side  began  to  change 
rapidly.
278 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


There  was  still  an  echo  as  of  following  feet  in  the  cutting 
behind  them;  a  rushing  noise  as  if  a  wind  were  rising  and 
pouring  through  the  branches  of  the  pines.
I  hope  it  was  nothing  worse  than  a  wicked  plot 
to  steal  one  of  my  blankets.’ 

‘I  never  thought  no  such  thing,’  answered  Sam,  in  no  mood 
for  jest.
from 
Frodo.
They  could  see  it  running  on  into  the  wood,  wide  in  places 
and  open  above,  though  every  now  and  again  the  trees  drew 
in  and  overshadowed  it  with  their  dark  boughs.
‘I  couldn’t  stay  to  hear  more,  sir,  since  you  were  waiting; 
and  I  didn’t  give  much  heed  to  it  myself.
The  vision  faded,  and  Frodo  found  that  he  was  looking  at 
the  cool  stars  twinkling  in  the  silver  basin.
494 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘But  let  us  talk  no  more  of  it.
‘That  hole  was 
plainly  a  well  for  the  guards’  use,  covered  with  a  stone  lid.
Narvi  and  his  craft  and  all  his  kindred  have 
vanished  from  the  earth.’ 

‘But  do  not  you  know  the  word,  Gandalf?’  asked  Boromir 
in  surprise.
There  was  an  eye  in  the 
Dark  Tower  that  did  not  sleep.
O  Light  to  us  that  wander  here 
Amid  the  world  of  woven  trees!
So  somehow  or  other 
we  must  find  the  Ford  of  Bruinen.’ 

The  rest  of  that  day  they  spent  scrambling  over  rocky 
ground.
Gimli  was  wandering 
about,  tapping  the  stone  here  and  there  with  his  axe.
It  would  have 


MANY  MEETINGS  293 

made  him  laugh.
‘G  for  Grand!’  they  shouted,  and  the 
old  man  smiled.
But  the  ques¬ 
tion  is:  who  will  follow  me,  if  I  lead  you  there?’ 

‘I  will,’  said  Gimli  eagerly.
Good  night  -  now, 
bless  me!
‘It  all  depends  on  what  you 


138 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


want,’  put  in  Merry.
But  he 
found  now  that  he  could  not  do  so,  not  without  a  great 
struggle.
Wonderful  folk,  Elves,  sir!
‘O  blessed  Meriadoc!’ 

‘Which  order  shall  we  go  in?’  said  Frodo.
Frodo  said  nothing,  but  Sam  looked  scared.
‘It  is  gone  now.
I  don’t  follow  you,  begging  your 
pardon.
‘There’s 
something  funny  about  all  this,  I  see;  but  it  must  wait  till  we 
get  in.’ 

They  turned  down  the  Ferry  lane,  which  was  straight  and 
well-kept  and  edged  with  large  white-washed  stones.
Still 
the  company  would  be  very  pleased  to  welcome  you,  if 
you  had  a  mind.
Hoy!’  came  the  thin  voices  out  of  the  mist:  and 
then  a  cry  that  sounded  like  help ,  help!
‘Not  that  I  ever  heard,’  said  Pippin.
The  sun,  a  pale  and  watery  yellow,  was 
gleaming  through  the  mist  just  above  the  west  wall  of  the 
hollow  in  which  they  lay;  north,  south,  and  east,  beyond  the 


i8o 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


wall  the  fog  was  thick,  cold  and  white.
They  had  been  locked  up  as  if 
they  were  very  precious,  but  they  were  so  patched  and 
weatherstained  that  their  original  colour  could  hardly  be 
guessed:  it  might  have  been  dark  green.
He  had  a  white  apron  on,  and  was 
bustling  out  of  one  door  and  in  through  another,  carrying  a 
tray  laden  with  full  mugs.
Sam 
quickly  blushed  and  hung  his  head.
’ 

‘I  cannot,’  said  Merry.
He  does  not  need  you  -  he  has  many 
more  useful  servants  -  but  he  won’t  forget  you  again.
‘Now  is  the  last  chance.
‘But  it  lies  many  miles  away.
The  Men  of  Bree  were  brown-haired,  broad,  and  rather 
short,  cheerful  and  independent:  they  belonged  to  nobody 
but  themselves;  but  they  were  more  friendly  and  familiar  with 
Hobbits,  Dwarves,  Elves,  and  other  inhabitants  of  the  world 
about  them  than  was  (or  is)  usual  with  Big  People.
Then  with  one  glance  at  the  Last 
Homely  House  twinkling  below  them  they  strode  away  far 
into  the  night.
‘I  am  sorry,’  he  said.
The  Forest  drew  close  to  the  hedge  in  many  places.
We  will  go  together.’ 

Frodo  finished  his  breakfast  in  silence.
Frodo  remained  silent.
‘Boromir,  and  any  that  go  with  him  seeking  Minas  Tirith, 
will  do  well  to  leave  the  Great  River  above  Rauros  and  cross 
the  Entwash  before  it  finds  the  marshes.
Tom  is  not 
master  of  Riders  from  the  Black  Land  far  beyond  his 
country.’ 

All  the  same  the  hobbits  wished  he  was  coming  with  them.
Your  path  now  goes  south.’ 

As  they  walked  through  Caras  Galadhon  the  green  ways 
were  empty;  but  in  the  trees  above  them  many  voices  were 
murmuring  and  singing.
Only  a  few  paces  from  the  ashes 
of  their  fire  the  snow  lay  many  feet  deep,  higher  than  the 
heads  of  the  hobbits;  in  places  it  had  been  scooped  and  piled 
by  the  wind  into  great  drifts  against  the  cliff.
They  knew  that  nothing  could  save  you,  if  the 
white  horse  could  not.
‘Hey  there!’  cried  Tom,  glancing  towards  him  with  a  most 
seeing  look  in  his  shining  eyes.
Towards  it  they  now  hurried  desiring  only  to  find  a 
fire,  and  a  door  between  them  and  the  night.
Strider  ordered  them  to  pick  him  up 
and  lay  him  near  the  fire,  and  then  he  disappeared.
But  now  the  trail  was 
fresh  and  swift,  and  it  led  not  to  Mordor  but  away.
Legolas  looked  up  and  answered 
in  the  same  language.* 

Who  are  they,  and  what  do  they  say?’  asked  Merry.
I  am  afraid  of  the  pool.
Do  you  think  they 
will  be  able  to  cure  him  in  Rivendell,  if  we  ever  get  there?’ 

We  shall  see,’  answered  Strider.
‘But  is  there  aught 
else  that  you  desire  of  me  at  our  parting?
‘They  took  me  and  they  set  me  alone  on  the  pinnacle  of 
Orthanc,  in  the  place  where  Saruman  was  accustomed  to 
watch  the  stars.
Ho!
‘And  now  to  bed!
‘Then 


444 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


many  of  the  Elves  of  Nimrodel’s  kindred  left  their  dwellings 
and  departed,  and  she  was  lost  far  in  the  South,  in  the  passes 
of  the  White  Mountains;  and  she  came  not  to  the  ship  where 
Amroth  her  lover  waited  for  her.
Doubt  came  into 
Frodo’s  mind:  was  this  a  vision  of  Gandalf  on  one  of  his 
many  lonely  journeys  long  ago,  or  was  it  Saruman?
He  was, 
indeed,  just  about  to  stop  and  propose  going  back  (if  that 
was  still  possible),  when  things  took  a  new  turn.
There  was  sky  above  them,  blue  and  clear  to  their 
surprise,  for  down  under  the  Forest-roof  they  had  not  been 
able  to  see  the  rising  morning  and  the  lifting  of  the  mist.
Northward,  where 
they  looked  most  hopefully,  they  could  see  nothing  that  might 
be  the  line  of  the  great  East  Road,  for  which  they  were 
making.
‘How  long  have  you  known  this?’  asked  Frodo  at  length.
A 
paddle  swirled  and  the  boat  put  about.
Tom  said  that  it  had  once  been  the  boundary  of 
a  kingdom,  but  a  very  long  time  ago.
Why  did  it  come  to  me?
Is  there  any 
barrow  on  Weathertop?’ 

‘No.
Doom ,  doom  went  the  drum-beats  again:  they  now  sounded 
muffled  and  far  away,  but  they  were  following.
After  a  while  he 
sighed,  and  got  up  and  went  out.
You  were  beginning  to  fade,’  answered 
Gandalf.
At  last  the  snow  stopped  altogether.
Then  he 
undervalued  it.
“We  shall  need  your  help,  and 
the  help  of  all  things  that  will  give  it.
Suddenly  Frodo  saw  a  hopeful  sign.
After  that  they  would  hardly  need  to  be  told  your  real 
name.
You  can  let  Mr.
A  mile 
southwards  along  the  shore  they  came  upon  holly  trees.
But  leave  out  the  eyes!’ 

‘That  I  won’t,’  said  Sam.
It  was  shapeless 
and  yet  significant:  like  a  landmark,  or  a  guarding  finger,  or 
more  like  a  warning.
There’s  nothing  to  be  seen  but  a  cold 
white  mark  on  his  shoulder.’ 

‘Frodo  has  been  touched  by  the  weapons  of  the  Enemy,’ 
said  Strider,  ‘and  there  is  some  poison  or  evil  at  work  that 
is  beyond  my  skill  to  drive  out.
Right  at  the  Balrog’s  feet  it  broke, 
and  the  stone  upon  which  it  stood  crashed  into  the  gulf,  while 
the  rest  remained,  poised,  quivering  like  a  tongue  of  rock 
thrust  out  into  emptiness.
In  fact,  I  don’t  mean  to,  and  I  have 
made  all  arrangements.
Even  Sauron  was  not  so.
Here,  Grip!
Very  slowly  a  dim 
light  began  to  grow.
Frodo  was  now  safe  in  the  Last  Homely  House  east  of  the 
Sea.
‘Yes,’  he  said,  ‘I  am  here.
‘Tell  me,  Legolas,  why  did  I  come  on  this  Quest?
But  in  the  Bree-land, 
at  any  rate,  the  hobbits  were  decent  and  prosperous,  and  no 
more  rustic  than  most  of  their  distant  relatives  Inside.
‘We  shall  see,’  said  Bilbo.
‘The  heights  away  north  are  whiter  than  they  were;  snow  is 
lying  far  down  their  shoulders.
There  is  another  talan  in  the  next 
tree.
They  had  no  time  to  find  any 
hiding-place  better  than  the  general  darkness  under  the  trees; 
Sam  and  Pippin  crouched  behind  a  large  tree-bole,  while 
Frodo  crept  back  a  few  yards  towards  the  lane.
The  others  halted  just  within  the 
doorway  at  the  hall’s  end,  and  turned,  unable  to  leave  their 
leader  to  face  the  enemy  alone.
It  is  no  small  feat  to  have  come  so  far,  and  through  such 
dangers,  still  bearing  the  Ring.’ 

‘We  should  never  have  done  it  without  Strider,’  said  Frodo.
‘But  you  were 
always  a  reckless  lad.
At  once.’ 

He  went  quickly  down  the  path  and  came  back  to  the  lawn 
where  Boromir  had  found  him.
There  I  shall  turn  to  my 
home,  alone  if  my  help  has  not  earned  the  reward  of  any 
companionship.’ 

The  day  was  now  growing,  and  the  fog  had  lifted  a  little.
There  was  a  harsh  croaking 
scream,  as  it  fell  out  of  the  air,  vanishing  down  into  the  gloom 
of  the  eastern  shore.
‘I  should  not  make 
use  of  it,  if  I  were  you.
Frodo’s  left  side  also  was  scored  and  bruised 
where  he  had  been  hurled  against  the  wall.
Then 
he  stepped  back.
I  slipped  over  the  gate  just  behind  them.
It  is  not  far,  but  our  path 
may  be  winding,  for  here  Aragorn  cannot  guide  us;  he  has 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK  391 

seldom  walked  in  this  country,  and  only  once  have  I  been 
under  the  west  wall  of  Moria,  and  that  was  long  ago.
He  was  kneeling  in  clear  sunlight  before  the  high  seat.
As  night  fell  and  the  light  of  the  fire  began  to  shine  out 
brightly  he  began  to  tell  them  tales  to  keep  their  minds  from 
fear.
Occasionally  the  Hobbits  of  Bree  went  as  far  as 
Buckland,  or  the  Eastfarthing;  but  though  their  little  land  was 
not  much  further  than  a  day’s  riding  east  of  the  Brandywine 
Bridge,  the  Hobbits  of  the  Shire  now  seldom  visited  it.
‘Bill  Ferny,  for  instance.
‘But  not  yet,  I  beg,  Master!’  cried  Bilbo.
It  had  a  cargo  of  fireworks,  as  they  rightly  guessed.
By  it  were  moored  many  boats  and  barges.
For  the 
traced  writing  was  indeed  as  Isildur  guessed,  in  the  tongue 
of  Mordor  and  the  servants  of  the  Tower.
‘You 
know  you  are  never  tired  of  reciting  your  own  verses.
The  wind  suddenly  fell  and  then  veered  round  to 
the  south.
The  number  must  be  few,  since 
your  hope  is  in  speed  and  secrecy.
I  expect  it’s  homelike  enough  inside.’ 

Even  from  the  outside  the  inn  looked  a  pleasant  house  to 
familiar  eyes.
A  star  came  out  above  the  trees  in  the  darkening 
East  before  them.
But  Goldberry 
laughed.
The  white  page  can  be  overwritten;  and 
the  white  light  can  be  broken.” 

‘  “In  which  case  it  is  no  longer  white,”  said  I.
The  outer  door  could  only  be  reached  by  a  slender  bridge  of 
stone,  without  kerb  or  rail,  that  spanned  the  chasm  with  one 
curving  spring  of  fifty  feet.
Most  of  the  Hobbits  and  the  Men  of  Bree  went  off  then  and 
there  in  a  huff,  having  no  fancy  for  further  entertainment  that 


212 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


evening.
324  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

If  simple  folk  are  free  from  care  and  fear,  simple  they  will  be, 
and  we  must  be  secret  to  keep  them  so.
‘Speed  now,  fair  guests!’  she  said.
Swiftly 
it  drew  near,  and  suddenly  the  boats  shot  through,  out  into 
a  wide  clear  light.
But  you 
commanded  me  to  name  my  desire.’ 

The  Elves  stirred  and  murmured  with  astonishment,  and 
Celeborn  gazed  at  the  Dwarf  in  wonder,  but  the  Lady  smiled.
‘We  must  try 
and  find  him  at  once.
He 
rubbed  them,  but  the  black  specks  remained.
Night  came  beneath  the  trees  as  they 
walked,  and  the  Elves  uncovered  their  silver  lamps.
Inside  there  was  no  air  stirring,  and  the  sky  seemed  near 
their  heads.
It’s  the  only 
way.’ 

‘Of  course  it  is,’  answered  Sam.
From  some  way  off, 
or  so  it  seemed,  he  thought  he  heard  a  cry:  ‘Hoy!
‘You  had  better  lead 
on  and  find  that  path,’  Frodo  said  to  him.
The  night 
was  growing  old.
I 
think  I  shall  come  with  you.’ 

So  great  was  Frodo’s  delight  at  this  announcement  that 
Gandalf  left  the  window-sill,  where  he  had  been  sitting,  and 
took  off  his  hat  and  bowed.
They 
ate  some  food,  and  then  they  took  to  their  paddles  and 
hastened  on  their  way.
‘I  don’t  know  what  stories  you  mean,’  Merry  answered.
Do 
you  know  that?’ 

‘Not  so  clearly.
We  may  not  have  a  chance  of  filling  our  skins  and 
bottles  till  we  come  down  into  Dimrill  Dale.’ 

‘How  long  is  that  going  to  take  us?’  asked  Frodo.
He  believed 
he  had  once  seen  an  Elf  in  the  woods,  and  still  hoped  to  see 
more  one  day.
But  it  could  not  be  found 
until  last  night.
I  could  see  that  even  Gildor  was  disturbed  when  he 
heard  that  Gandalf  had  never  appeared.
‘As  you  go  down  the  water,’  he  said,  ‘you  will  find  that  the 
trees  will  fail,  and  you  will  come  to  a  barren  country.
There  seemed  no  chance  of  reaching 
the  Ford  before  he  was  cut  off  by  the  others  that  had  lain  in 
ambush.
He  drew  out  the  hilt, 
which  he  had  kept,  and  handed  it  to  the  Elf.
‘Queer  things  you  do  hear  these  days,  to  be  sure,’  said  Sam.
‘I  am  no  good  after  all.
Do  as  you  promised:  give  it  up!’ 

‘Well,  if  you  want  my  ring  yourself,  say  so!’  cried  Bilbo.
Took.’ 

It  seemed  plain  that  the  farmer  would  tell  them  more,  if 
allowed  to  do  it  in  his  own  time  and  fashion,  so  they  all 
accepted  the  invitation.
There  was  a  sound  as  of  a 
wind  rising  and  spreading  outwards  to  the  branches  of  all  the 
other  trees  round  about,  as  though  they  had  dropped  a  stone 
into  the  quiet  slumber  of  the  river-valley  and  set  up  ripples 
of  anger  that  ran  out  over  the  whole  Forest.
‘But  in  that  case  there  are  a  lot  of 
things  to  do  before  we  go  to  bed  -  under  a  roof,  for  tonight 
at  any  rate.’ 

‘Oh!
Away  in  the  east  the 
evening  light  lay  pale  upon  the  dim  lands  of  distant  plain 
and  wood.
So  bright  was  it  that  the  figure  of  the  Elven-lady  cast 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL 


475 


a  dim  shadow  on  the  ground.
‘You  have  a  stout 
heart,’  he  said;  ‘but  it  was  foolish.’ 

‘I  don’t  know,’  said  Merry.
I  have  been  expecting  Gandalf  for  many  days.
I  have  wandered  for  some  time  since.
A  few 
more  hours  and  you  would  have  been  beyond  our  aid.
But  it  wasn’t 
mushrooms  I  was  thinking  of.
But  weary  as  they  were  only 
Sam  found  that  easy  to  do.
A  special  entrance  was  cut  into  the  bank 
leading  to  the  road,  and  wide  steps  and  a  large  white  gate 
were  built  there.
Ho!
I  must  be  off.’ 

‘How  long  do  you  think  I  shall  have  here?’  said  Frodo  to 
Bilbo  when  Gandalf  had  gone.
The  voice  of  Pippin  was  suddenly  lifted  up  above  the 
others  in  one  of  Bilbo’s  favourite  bath-songs.
For  if  that  tongue  is  not  soon  to  be  heard  in 
every  corner  of  the  West,  then  let  all  put  doubt  aside  that  this 
thing  is  indeed  what  the  Wise  have  declared:  the  treasure  of 
the  Enemy,  fraught  with  all  his  malice;  and  in  it  lies  a  great 
part  of  his  strength  of  old.
There 
were  fountains  of  butterflies  that  flew  glittering  into  the  trees; 
there  were  pillars  of  coloured  fires  that  rose  and  turned  into 
eagles,  or  sailing  ships,  or  a  phalanx  of  flying  swans;  there 
was  a  red  thunderstorm  and  a  shower  of  yellow  rain;  there 
was  a  forest  of  silver  spears  that  sprang  suddenly  into  the  air 
with  a  yell  like  an  embattled  army,  and  came  down  again  into 
the  Water  with  a  hiss  like  a  hundred  hot  snakes.
Took  and  Mr.
It  is  said  that  there  are  still 
havens  of  the  High  Elves,  but  they  are  far  north  and  west, 
beyond  the  land  of  the  Halflings.
Frodo!
Pippin  laughed.
‘He  suspects,  but  he  does  not  know  -  not  yet.
Or  put  it  off 
till  after  dinner?’ 

No  one  answered.
Heavy  feet  were  heard  in  the  corridor.
‘For  myself,  I  believe  that  he  was 
here,  and  was  in  danger.
It  wandered  off  southwards  and  passed  out  of  the 
Wood-elves’  ken,  and  was  lost.
‘Of  this  stream  the  Silvan 
Elves  made  many  songs  long  ago,  and  still  we  sing  them  in 
the  North,  remembering  the  rainbow  on  its  falls,  and  the 
golden  flowers  that  floated  in  its  foam.
Why?
In  the  darkness  it  was 
hard  to  be  sure  that  they  were  indeed  moving  at  all;  but  slowly 
the  swirl  of  the  water  grew  less,  and  the  shadow  of  the  eastern 
bank  faded  back  into  the  night.
I  can  sleep 
tomorrow,  being  no  more  than  luggage  in  a  boat,  as  you 
might  say.’ 


500  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

‘I  might,’  said  Frodo,  ‘and  I  might  say  “luggage  with  eyes”.
Black  smoke  seemed  to  cloud  the  surface  of 
the  Mirror.
But  they  had  not  gone  more  than  a  furlong  when 
the  storm  returned  with  fresh  fury.
‘What 
may  you  be  wanting?’ 

‘Beds  for  four,  and  stabling  for  five  ponies,  if  that  can  be 
managed.
Drogo, 
he  married  poor  Miss  Primula  Brandybuck.
‘Perhaps  you  would  rather  go  to  your  beds.
‘There’s  only  stars,  as  I  thought,’  he  said.
I  think 
after  all  you  may  need  my  company  on  the  Road.’ 

At  first  Frodo  was  a  good  deal  disturbed,  and  wondered 
often  what  Gandalf  could  have  heard;  but  his  uneasiness 
wore  off,  and  in  the  fine  weather  he  forgot  his  troubles  for  a 
while.
No  one  had  a  more  attentive  audience  than  old  Flam 
Gamgee,  commonly  known  as  the  Gaffer.
When  he  had  dressed,  Frodo  found  that  while  he  slept  the 
Ring  had  been  hung  about  his  neck  on  a  new  chain,  light  but 
strong.
A  long  whitish  hand  could 
be  dimly  seen  as  it  shot  out  and  grabbed  the  gunwale;  two 
pale  lamplike  eyes  shone  coldly  as  they  peered  inside,  and 
then  they  lifted  and  gazed  up  at  Frodo  on  the  eyot.
He  entered  behind  Haldir,  and  found  that  he  was  in  a 
chamber  of  oval  shape,  in  the  midst  of  which  grew  the  trunk 
of  the  great  mallorn,  now  tapering  towards  its  crown,  and  yet 
making  still  a  pillar  of  wide  girth.
Underhill  to 
go  vanishing  into  thin  air;  or  into  thick  air,  as  is  more  likely 
in  this  room.’ 

‘Well,  where  is  he  now?’  cried  several  voices.
Nearly  singed  the  hair  off  my  head!’ 

When  the  full  light  of  the  morning  came  no  signs  of 
the  wolves  were  to  be  found,  and  they  looked  in  vain  for  the 
bodies  of  the  dead.
That  seems  to  end  a  chapter.
‘When  are  you  going  to  open  that  letter?’ 
Frodo  looked  carefully  at  the  seal  before  he  broke  it.
Yonder  eastward  arch?’ 

‘Maybe,’  said  Gandalf.
‘Are  enemies  at  hand?’ 

‘Let  us  see  what  Sting  may  show,’  answered  Aragorn.
You  can  say  what  you  like,  Gaffer, 
but  Bag  End’s  a  queer  place,  and  its  folk  are  queerer.’ 

‘And  you  can  say  what  you  like,  about  what  you  know  no 
more  of  than  you  do  of  boating,  Mr.
A  shadow 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


63 


fell  on  my  heart  then,  though  I  did  not  know  yet  what  I 
feared.
Frodo  crawled  to  the  edge  of  the  road  and  watched  the 
rider,  until  he  dwindled  into  the  distance.
Soon  it  began 
to  descend  rapidly  and  they  guessed  that  it  must  actually 
be  heading  towards  the  Withywindle  valley:  not  at  all  the 


150 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


direction  they  wished  to  take.
But  still  the  sunken  stars  appear 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


413 


In  dark  and  windless  Mirrormere; 

There  lies  his  crown  in  water  deep, 

Till  Dnrin  wakes  again  from  sleep.
‘Elrond  received  news  that 
troubled  him.
‘They  are  not  all  here  yet.
So  it  was  that  Frodo  saw  her  whom  few  mortals  had  yet 
seen;  Arwen,  daughter  of  Elrond,  in  whom  it  was  said  that 
the  likeness  of  Luthien  had  come  on  earth  again;  and  she  was 
called  Undomiel,  for  she  was  the  Evenstar  of  her  people.
There  were  thousands  of  them,  and  they  squeaked  all 
round,  neek-breek ,  breek-neek,  unceasingly  all  the  night,  until 
the  hobbits  were  nearly  frantic.
‘Gollum’s  doing,  I’ll  be  bound,’  said  Sam  to  Frodo.
When  she 
arrived  later  in  the  day,  she  took  the  point  at  once,  but  she 
also  took  the  spoons.
But  that  was  quite  by  accident.
For  in  the  autumn  their  leaves 
fall  not,  but  turn  to  gold.
‘But  we  were  too  late,  as  Elrond  foresaw.
No  one  has  ever  caught  old  Tom  walking  in 
the  forest,  wading  in  the  water,  leaping  on  the  hill-tops  under 
light  and  shadow.
‘A  Balrog!
Who  did  you  think  it  was?’  said  Merry 
coming  forward.
‘But  if  he  goes  east,  then  all  need  not  go  with  him; 
nor  do  I  think  that  all  should.
Even  Pippin  is  up.
They  were  standing  in  an  open  space.
Suddenly  Gimli,  who  had  pressed  on  ahead,  called  back  to 
them.
Frodo  shuddered  with  disgust 
at  the  touch  of  the  dark  unclean  water  on  his  feet.
‘Down  in  the 
Southfarthing  they  have  had  trouble  with  Big  People,  I 
believe.
The  Company  swept  past  them  and  took  no 
heed  of  them.
Maggot  got  down  and  took  a  good  look  either  way,  north 
and  south,  but  nothing  could  be  seen  in  the  darkness,  and 
there  was  not  a  sound  in  the  still  air.
There  was  a  flash  like  flame  and 
the  helm  burst  asunder.
Double  sharp!
We  cannot  long  halt 
here.
What,  if  my  fear  was  true,  should  be  done  with  it?
It  went  steadily  down  for  a  long  while  before  it 
became  level  once  again.
‘But  do  not 


226 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


give  up  hope!
The  history 
of  Elendil  and  Isildur  and  the  One  Ring  is  known  to  all  the 
Wise.
The  water  looked  hard  and  dark.
The  enemy  has  many  spies  and  many  ways 
of  hearing.’ 

Suddenly  he  stopped  as  if  listening.
We 
don’t  often  get  a  party  out  of  the  Shire  nowadays,  and  I 
should  be  sorry  not  to  make  you  welcome.
But  there  was  something  in  the  look  and  the 
voice  of  the  gatekeeper  that  made  him  uneasy.
Baggins  had  left  his 
old  home  for  good.
We  must  depart  into  the  West,  or  dwindle  to  a  rustic  folk  of 
dell  and  cave,  slowly  to  forget  and  to  be  forgotten.’ 

Frodo  bent  his  head.
But  there  is  much  else  that  may  be  told.’ 

Throughout  the  rest  of  the  meal  they  talked  together,  but 
Frodo  listened  more  than  he  spoke;  for  the  news  of  the  Shire, 
apart  from  the  Ring,  seemed  small  and  far-away  and  unim¬ 
portant,  while  Gloin  had  much  to  tell  of  events  in  the  northern 
regions  of  Wilderland.
And  if  it  is 
Gandalf,’  he  added  as  an  afterthought,  ‘we  can  give  him  a 
little  surprise,  to  pay  him  out  for  being  so  late.
And 
he  has  at  last  heard,  I  think,  of  hobbits  and  the  Shire.
He  felt  too  comfortable  and  peaceful 
to  argue,  and  in  any  case  he  did  not  think  he  would  get  the 
better  of  an  argument.
And  I 
will  begin  that  tale,  though  others  shall  end  it.’ 

Then  all  listened  while  Elrond  in  his  clear  voice  spoke  of 
Sauron  and  the  Rings  of  Power,  and  their  forging  in  the 
Second  Age  of  the  world  long  ago.
‘Step  forward,  Sam!’  said  Merry;  and  Sam  stood  up  with 
a  face  scarlet  up  to  the  ears.
So  my  friends  think,  those  that  hunted  him  for  me.
“He  got  at  them,  in  spite  of  all  that  I  could  do,  and  they 
took  up  with  him.
Put  it  out!’  cried  Merry.
But  I’m  glad,  Sam.
We  allow  no  strangers  to  spy  out  the 


452 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


secrets  of  the  Naith.
Even  the  wild  things 
in  the  fields  and  woods  hardly  noticed  their  passing.
The  grass  was 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


26l 


scanty,  coarse,  and  grey;  and  the  leaves  in  the  thickets  were 
faded  and  falling.
‘Keep  the 
fire  going  well,  and  keep  Frodo  warm!’  he  said.
Good  night  to 
you  all!’  At  last  Mr.
‘And  I  am  still  in 
the  Shire,’  he  thought,  as  his  hand  touched  the  chain  on 
which  it  hung.
They  seemed  to  think  that  the 
Enemy  was  looking  high  and  low  for  me,  and  would  make 
mincemeat  of  me,  if  he  caught  me  tottering  about  in  the 
Wild.
‘I  will  help  you  bear  this  burden,  as  long  as  it  is 
yours  to  bear.
Never  before  had  any 
man  mounted  him,  but  I  took  him  and  I  tamed  him,  and  so 
speedily  he  bore  me  that  I  reached  the  Shire  when  Frodo  was 
on  the  Barrow-downs,  though  I  set  out  from  Rohan  only 
when  he  set  out  from  Hobbiton.
‘  “The  Enemy  must  have  some  great  need  or  purpose,” 
said  Radagast;  “but  what  it  is  that  makes  him  look  to  these 
distant  and  desolate  parts,  I  cannot  guess.” 

‘  “What  do  you  mean?”  said  I.
‘Swords  are  no  more 
use  here.
Then 
I  heard  Bilbo’s  strange  story  of  how  he  had  “won”  it,  and  I 
could  not  believe  it.
Of 
these  there  were  many:  small  fowl  whistling  and  piping  in  the 
reeds,  but  they  were  seldom  seen.
To  tell  you  the  truth,  I  had  very 
little  hope;  for  I  suspected  that  there  was  some  fragment  of 
the  blade  still  in  the  closed  wound.
At  length  the  Lady 
spoke  again.
‘Yes,’  he  answered.
There  now  seemed  hardly  a  sound  in  the  air.
Some  of 
the  hobbits  looked  at  Frodo  and  laughed  and  clapped,  think¬ 
ing  that  Mr.
We  shall  be  fortunate  indeed  if  we  do  not  find  the  Last 
Bridge  held  against  us.’ 

Next  day,  early  in  the  morning,  they  came  down  again  to 
the  borders  of  the  Road.
Suddenly  at  the  top  of  the  stair  there  was  a  stab  of  white 
light.
Tell  them  to 
bring  news  of  anything  that  bears  on  this  matter  to  Saruman 
and  Gandalf.
There  used  to  be  a  shallow  valley  beyond  the  falls  right  up 
to  the  Walls  of  Moria,  and  the  Sirannon  flowed  through  it 
with  the  road  beside  it.
The  Ruling  Ring?
The  last  stage  of  the 
Quest  was  before  them.
‘I  am  Gildor,’  answered  their  leader,  the  Elf  who  had  first 
hailed  him.
He  longed  suddenly  to 
fly  like  a  bird  to  rest  in  the  green  city.
The  dusk  of  evening  seemed 
to  grow  lighter  about  him,  as  if  a  cloud  had  been  withdrawn.
In  this  high  place  you  may  see  the  two 
powers  that  are  opposed  one  to  another;  and  ever  they  strive 
now  in  thought,  but  whereas  the  light  perceives  the  very  heart 
of  the  darkness,  its  own  secret  has  not  been  discovered.
This  is  the  River  Withywindle!
‘The  legs  of  Men  will  lag  on  a 
rough  road,  while  a  Dwarf  goes  on,  be  the  burden  twice  his 
own  weight,  Master  Boromir!’ 

The  task  proved  hard  indeed,  yet  in  the  end  it  was  done.
‘But 
there  is  no  great  hurry.
I 
suppose  he  was  right.’ 

‘I  don’t  know,’  said  Frodo.
‘For  my  part  I  forgive  your  doubt,’  he  said.
Then  for  a  while  hope  left  me,  and  I  did  not 
wait  to  gather  news,  or  I  might  have  been  comforted;  but  I 
rode  on  the  trail  of  the  Riders.
Sam  sipped  his  beer  suspiciously.
It  then  crawled,  or 
went  crouching,  back  into  the  gloom  beyond  the  lamps.
The  Silmaril  she  bound  on  him 
and  crowned  him  with  the  living  light, 
and  dauntless  then  with  burning  brow 
he  turned  his  prow;  and  in  the  night 
from  Otherworld  beyond  the  Sea 
there  strong  and  free  a  storm  arose, 
a  wind  of  power  in  Tarmenel; 
by  paths  that  seldom  mortal  goes 
his  boat  it  bore  with  biting  breath 
as  might  of  death  across  the  grey 


306 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


and  long-forsaken  seas  distressed: 
from  east  to  west  he  passed  away.
I’m  that  busy.
‘Neither  brave  nor  silly,  I  think.
You  lie  down 
now,  and  I  will  keep  watch  for  what  is  left  of  the  night.
‘We  haven’t  had 
a  song  or  a  tale  for  days.’ 

‘Not  since  Weathertop,’  said  Frodo.
‘I  can  hear  a  pony  or  a  horse  coming  along  the  road 
behind,’  said  Sam.
Suddenly  resolve 
hardened  in  him,  and  he  seized  a  short  sword  that  lay  beside 
him,  and  kneeling  he  stooped  low  over  the  bodies  of  his 
companions.
‘We  left  Hobbiton  secretly 
enough,  and  I  don’t  see  how  he  could  have  followed  us.’ 

‘What  about  the  smelling,  sir?’  said  Sam.
There  they  took  food  and  drink,  and  made  as  good  a  noon- 
meal  under  the  open  sky  as  anyone  could  wish;  for  the  food 
came  from  ‘down  under  Hill’.
Which 
shore  will  you  now  take?’ 

‘If  my  advice  is  heeded,  it  will  be  the  western  shore,  and 
the  way  to  Minas  Tirith,’  answered  Boromir.
They  did  not  hurry  to 
bed  afterwards,  for  they  expected  to  have  all  the  night  to 
sleep  in,  and  they  did  not  mean  to  go  on  again  until  the 
evening  of  the  next  day.
And  have 
an  eye  on  that  dwarf!’ 

Legolas  at  once  went  down  the  ladder  to  take  Haldir’s 
message;  and  soon  afterwards  Merry  and  Pippin  clambered 
up  on  to  the  high  flet.
Some  perfunctory  clapping  by  the  elders;  and  some 
loud  shouts  of  ‘Frodo!
‘The  Sun  sinks  early.
Old  Troll  laughed,  when  he  heard  Tom  groan, 

And  he  knew  his  toes  could  feel  it.
Bilbo  met 
the  guests  (and  additions)  at  the  new  white  gate  in  person.
Fighting  had  not  before  occurred 
to  any  of  them  as  one  of  the  adventures  in  which  their  flight 
would  land  them.
There  came  the  soft  sound  of  horses 
led  with  stealth  along  the  lane.
‘There  lies  the  Mirrormere,  deep  Kheled-zaram!’  said 
Gimli  sadly.
The  secret 
won’t  keep  for  long,  of  course;  but  at  present  it  is,  I  think, 
only  known  to  us  conspirators.
There  the  road, 
which  had  been  veering  southwards  between  the  brink  of  the 
channel  and  a  steep  fall  of  the  land  to  the  left,  turned  and 
went  due  east  again.
‘This  is  a  friend  of  Gandalf ’s.
There  were  some  fallen  rocks  on  the  edge  of  the  dell 
nearest  to  the  hill.
After  a  while 
Gandalf  got  up,  closed  the  shutters  outside  the  window,  and 
drew  the  curtains.
For  he’ll  screw  himself  up  all 
right,  as  sure  as  his  name’s  Baggins.’ 

‘I  believe  you  speak  more  wisely  than  any  of  us,  Sam,’  said 
Aragorn.
‘Evil  things  do  not  come  into  this  valley;  but  all  the 
same  we  should  not  name  them.
‘Orophin  has  now  gone  in  haste  back  to  our  dwellings  to 
warn  our  people.
The  hobbits,  bent  nearly  double, 
toiled  along  behind  the  taller  folk,  but  it  was  plain  that  they 
could  not  go  much  further,  if  the  snow  continued.
‘Down  the  deep-cloven  way  that  climbs  beside  the 
torrent  we  should  have  come,  if  fortune  had  been  kinder.’ 

‘Or  Caradhras  less  cruel,’  said  Gimli.
Soon  there  will  be 
feasting  and  merrymaking  to  celebrate  the  victory  at  the  Ford 
of  Bruinen,  and  you  will  all  be  there  in  places  of  honour.’ 

‘Splendid!’  said  Frodo.
The  stone  floor  was  swim¬ 
ming.
There  they 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


379 


stood,  stooping  in  a  circle  round  the  little  dancing  and  blow¬ 
ing  flames.
Being  deprived  of  sight,  Frodo  found  his 
hearing  and  other  senses  sharpened.
Fie  held  forth  at 
The  Ivy  Bush,  a  small  inn  on  the  Bywater  road;  and  he  spoke 
with  some  authority,  for  he  had  tended  the  garden  at  Bag 
End  for  forty  years,  and  had  helped  old  Holman  in  the  same 
job  before  that.
‘It’s  most  unfair,’  said  Pippin.
They  looked  back.
Aragorn 
stirred  in  his  sleep,  turned  over,  and  sat  up.
‘No  one  ever  has  luck  in  there.
The  very  desire  of  it 
corrupts  the  heart.
And  over  me  the 
Ring  would  gain  a  power  still  greater  and  more  deadly.’  His 
eyes  flashed  and  his  face  was  lit  as  by  a  fire  within.
‘Neither  do  I,’  answered  the  wizard.
I  was  not  sure  of  it 
myself  when  I  was  last  here;  but  the  time  has  come  to  speak.
It  was 
not  polite;  nor  strictly  true,  for  the  sale  of  Bag  End  did  not 
take  effect  until  midnight.
Bilbo 
slowed  down,  and  then  hey  presto!
I  was  half  asleep  when  you  began, 
and  it  seemed  to  follow  on  from  something  that  I  was  dream¬ 
ing  about.
‘No  more,  no  more!’  cried  the  Elves  laughing.
O!
I  can’t  get  it  now.’ 

At  that  moment  Elrond  came  out  with  Gandalf,  and  he 
called  the  Company  to  him.
‘Yes,  I  shall  be  moving  this  autumn,’  he  said.
“I  did  not 
expect  you  to  show  wisdom,  even  in  your  own  behalf;  but 
I  gave  you  the  chance  of  aiding  me  willingly,  and  so  saving 
yourself  much  trouble  and  pain.
The  water  rippled  on  either  side  of  the  white  breast 
beneath  its  curving  neck.
Don’t  you  crush  my  lilies!’ 

‘My  friends  are  caught  in  the  willow-tree,’  cried  Frodo 
breathlessly.
That  is  my  belief.’ 

‘Yet  all  the  Elves  are  willing  to  endure  this  chance,’  said 
Glorfindel,  ‘if  by  it  the  power  of  Sauron  may  be  broken,  and 
the  fear  of  his  dominion  be  taken  away  for  ever.’ 

‘Thus  we  return  once  more  to  the  destroying  of  the  Ring,’ 
said  Erestor,  ‘and  yet  we  come  no  nearer.
‘I  shall  lead  you  well, 
and  the  paths  are  smooth  and  straight.’ 

‘Alas  for  the  folly  of  these  days!’  said  Legolas.
‘Now  is  the  time!’  cried  Gandalf.
There  was  a  bub¬ 
bling  noise,  and  then  silence.
‘Look!’  he  cried;  and  stooping  he  lifted  from  the  ground  a 
black  cloak  that  had  lain  there  hidden  by  the  darkness.
‘If  the  sun  is  shining 
outside,  we  may  still  escape.
‘But  often  I  must  put  mirth  aside.
The  flowers 
glowed  red  and  golden:  snap-dragons  and  sunflowers,  and 
nasturtians  trailing  all  over  the  turf  walls  and  peeping  in  at 
the  round  windows.
These  things  the  Elves  of  Middle-earth 
have  in  some  measure  gained,  though  with  sorrow.
At  last  he 
broke  the  silence.
‘Even  if  I  wanted  another  companion,  I  should  not 
agree  to  any  such  thing,  until  I  knew  a  good  deal  more  about 
you,  and  your  business.’ 


214 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Excellent!’  exclaimed  Strider,  crossing  his  legs  and  sitting 
back  comfortably.
Let  us  go!’ 

‘I  do  not  know  which  to  hope,’  said  Boromir  grimly:  ‘that 
Gandalf  will  find  what  he  seeks,  or  that  coming  to  the  cliff 
we  shall  find  the  gates  lost  for  ever.
The  wind 
blows  from  the  East  there,  for  they  look  out  over  the  Dead 
Marshes  and  the  Noman-lands  to  Cirith  Gorgor  and  the 
black  gates  of  Mordor.
‘I  dwelt  there  once,  and  still  I  return 


264  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

when  I  may.
There  was  no  laughter,  and  no  song  or  music.
Every  moment  they  expected  to  feel  the  bite  of 
black-feathered  arrows.
We  have  been  terrified  that  you 
might  give  us  the  slip,  and  go  off  suddenly,  all  on  your  own 
like  he  did.
They  followed  the  track  for  some  while,  for  it  offered  much 
the  easiest  way  down,  but  they  went  cautiously,  and  their 
anxiety  increased  as  they  came  into  the  dark  woods,  and  the 
path  grew  plainer  and  broader.
‘Morning,  Longshanks!’  he  said.
‘He’ll  squeeze  me  in 
two,  if  you  don’t.
‘Come  then!’  he  said.
The  last  thing  written  is  in  a  trailing 
scrawl  of  elf-letters:  they  are  coming.
May  Elrond 
and  the  others  forgive  the  length  of  it.
But  I  no  longer  doubt  my  guess.
They  packed 
up  as  quickly  as  their  chilled  fingers  would  work.
But  if  you  demand  advice, 
I  will  for  friendship’s  sake  give  it.
But  when  he  had  at  last  told 
me  his  history,  as  far  as  the  end  of  the  Riddle-game  and 
Bilbo’s  escape,  he  would  not  say  any  more,  except  in  dark 
hints.
“Why  not?
Frodo?’ 

‘I  should  make  nothing  of  it  but  a  log  and  the  dusk  and 
sleep  in  your  eyes,  Sam,’  said  Frodo,  ‘if  this  was  the  first  time 
that  those  eyes  had  been  seen.
Go  after  those  two  young  hobbits,  and  guard 
them  at  the  least,  even  if  you  cannot  find  Frodo.
There  on  the 
hill-brow  she  stood  beckoning  to  them:  her  hair  was  flying 
loose,  and  as  it  caught  the  sun  it  shone  and  shimmered.
He  guessed  that  even  in  Elrond’s  house  the  matter 
of  the  Ring  was  not  one  for  casual  talk;  and  in  any  case  he 
wished  to  forget  his  troubles  for  a  time.
The  others  halted,  and  Aragorn  ran 
back,  calling  to  Boromir  to  come  with  him.
Shrill  went  the 
arrow  from  the  elven-string.
Their  piercing  cries  were  drowned  in  the  roaring  of  the  river 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


28l 


as  it  carried  them  away.
‘I  am  not  going  to  do  anything.
They  came  to  the  West-gate  and  found 
it  shut;  but  at  the  door  of  the  lodge  beyond  it,  there  was  a 
man  sitting.
Over  the 
door  was  painted  in  white  letters:  the  prancing  pony  by 
barliman  butterbur.
And  I  don’t  seem  able  to  make  up  my  mind.’ 

‘Then  trust  mine,’  said  Gandalf.
Go  on!
‘And  don’t  think  I’m  finding  fault.
The  Ring  misseth,  maybe,  the  heat  of 
Sauron’s  hand,  which  was  black  and  yet  burned  like  fire, 
and  so  Gil-galad  was  destroyed;  and  maybe  were  the  gold 
made  hot  again,  the  writing  would  be  refreshed.
Four  only  were  saved  by  swimming:  my 
brother  and  myself  and  two  others.
I  am  Goldberry,  daughter  of  the  River.’  Then 
lightly  she  passed  them  and  closing  the  door  she  turned  her 
back  to  it,  with  her  white  arms  spread  out  across  it.
That  was  a  kingly  gift!’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Gandalf.
Here  it  is  in  my 
pocket!’  He  hesitated.
Anduin  the  Great  flows  past  many  shores,  ere  it 
comes  to  Argonath  and  the  Gates  of  Gondor.’ 

‘Still  it  might  be  well  for  all,’  said  Gloin  the  Dwarf,  ‘if  all 
these  strengths  were  joined,  and  the  powers  of  each  were 
used  in  league.
He  cast  his  sword  upon 
the  table  that  stood  before  Elrond,  and  the  blade  was  in  two 
pieces.
It  climbed 
away  from  the  main  road  in  the  Water-valley,  and  wound 
over  the  skirts  of  the  Green  Hills  towards  Woody  End,  a  wild 
corner  of  the  Eastfarthing.
They  were  just  in  time.
As  they  were  healed  of  hurt 
and  weariness  of  body  the  grief  of  their  loss  grew  more  keen.
‘Yes,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘and  I  do  not  like  it.
‘Ah!
Behind  it  a  steep  shoulder  of  the  land  lay  grey  and  bare,  and 


i6o 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


beyond  that  the  dark  shapes  of  the  Barrow-downs  stalked 
away  into  the  eastern  night.
He  began  to  say  to  himself: 
‘Perhaps  I  shall  cross  the  River  myself  one  day.’  To  which 
the  other  half  of  his  mind  always  replied:  ‘Not  yet.’ 

So  it  went  on,  until  his  forties  were  running  out,  and  his 
fiftieth  birthday  was  drawing  near:  fifty  was  a  number  that 
he  felt  was  somehow  significant  (or  ominous) ;  it  was  at  any 
rate  at  that  age  that  adventure  had  suddenly  befallen  Bilbo.
I  am  per¬ 
mitted  to  wear  the  One  Ring:  why  cannot  /  see  all  the  others 
and  know  the  thoughts  of  those  that  wear  them?’ 

‘You  have  not  tried,’  she  said.
But  you  have  not  forsaken  your  com¬ 
panions,  and  the  least  reward  that  you  shall  have  is  that  the 
memory  of  Lothlorien  shall  remain  ever  clear  and  unstained 
in  your  heart,  and  shall  neither  fade  nor  grow  stale.’ 

‘Maybe,’  said  Gimli;  ‘and  I  thank  you  for  your  words.
‘Long  tales 
are  thirsty.
In  the  pale  ray  of  the  wizard’s 
staff,  Frodo  caught  glimpses  of  stairs  and  arches,  and  of  other 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


405 


passages  and  tunnels,  sloping  up,  or  running  steeply  down, 
or  opening  blankly  dark  on  either  side.
Beside  Glorfindel  there  were  several  other 
counsellors  of  Elrond’s  household,  of  whom  Erestor  was  the 
chief;  and  with  him  was  Galdor,  an  Elf  from  the  Grey  Havens 
who  had  come  on  an  errand  from  Cirdan  the  Shipwright.
The  highest  of  them  was  at  the  right  of  the  line  and  a 
little  separated  from  the  others.
A  green  ride  lay  almost  unseen 
through  the  thickets  on  the  right;  and  this  they  followed  as  it 
wound  away  back  up  the  wooded  slopes  on  to  the  top  of 
a  shoulder  of  the  hills  that  stood  out  into  the  lower  land 
of  the  river-valley.
Strider  has  hidden  all  the  rest  of 
our  baggage  in  a  deep  drift  of  leaves.’ 

‘You  had  no  need  of  your  burdens,’  said  Haldir.
‘Though  I  am  not  sure  that  I  under¬ 
stand  you.
At 
the  moment  I  will  only  say  that  I  was  held  captive.’ 

‘You?’  cried  Frodo.
But  if  Saruman  has  become  evil,  as  you  say, 
then  their  doom  cannot  be  long  delayed.” 

‘He  set  me  down  in  the  land  of  Rohan  ere  dawn;  and  now 
I  have  lengthened  my  tale  over  long.
He  hardly  dared  to  breathe,  and 
yet  the  desire  to  get  it  out  of  his  pocket  became  so  strong  that 
he  began  slowly  to  move  his  hand.
Fair  River-daughter!
Let  us  go  and  see  what  things  are  like 
now!’ 

They  found  the  stone  steps  without  difficulty,  and  Gimli 
sprang  swiftly  up  them,  followed  by  Gandalf  and  Frodo.
It  would 
be  the  last  straw,  if  we  had  to  go  out  in  the  dark  to  look  for 
him.’ 

At  that  moment  they  heard  a  door  slam;  then  feet  came 
running  along  the  passage.
Less  than  a  mile  away, 
and  a  little  below  them,  for  they  still  stood  high  up  on  the 
west  side  of  the  dale,  there  lay  a  mere.
‘But  what  will 
happen  when  they  have  penetrated  the  disguise?’ 

‘We  shall  see,’  said  Strider.
But  I  saw  him  once  again,  far  from 
here.’  He  would  say  no  more  about  Bilbo,  and  Frodo  fell 
silent.
Not  that  I  liked  the  sound  of  him.
All  they  could  do  was  to  follow  the  fold  -  downwards.
It  seemed  that  the  evil  power 
in  Mirkwood  had  been  driven  out  by  the  White  Council 
only  to  reappear  in  greater  strength  in  the  old  strongholds  of 
Mordor.
There  is  much  to  hear  and  decide  today.’ 

Suddenly  as  they  were  talking  a  single  clear  bell  rang  out.
‘Oh,  I  don’t  know.
‘I  got  here  without  much  adventure,’  he  said,  ‘and  after  a 
rest  I  went  on  with  the  dwarves  to  Dale:  my  last  journey.
But  low  in  the  South  one  star 
shone  red.
‘But  whatever  you  may  do,  we  at  least  cannot  stay 
in  that  valley.
He  was  covered  with  green 
slime.
The  Sackville -Bagginses  were  not  forgotten.
As  time  went  on,  people  began  to  notice  that  Frodo  also 
showed  signs  of  good  ‘preservation’:  outwardly  he  retained 
the  appearance  of  a  robust  and  energetic  hobbit  just  out  of 
his  tweens.
‘Stand  still!’  he  whispered  to  the  others.
Evening  will  follow  day.
‘At  first  we  were  weary  and  danger  was 
too  close  behind;  and  afterwards  we  almost  forgot  our  grief 
for  a  time,  as  we  walked  in  gladness  on  the  fair  paths  of 
Lorien.’ 

‘Yet  our  grief  is  great  and  our  loss  cannot  be  mended,’  said 
Frodo.
In  seven  days  the  Company 
must  depart.’ 

The  Sword  of  Elendil  was  forged  anew  by  Elvish  smiths, 
and  on  its  blade  was  traced  a  device  of  seven  stars  set  between 
the  crescent  Moon  and  the  rayed  Sun,  and  about  them  was 
written  many  runes;  for  Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn  was  going 
to  war  upon  the  marches  of  Mordor.
Goldberry  shall 
wear  it  now,  and  we  will  not  forget  her!’ 

For  each  of  the  hobbits  he  chose  a  dagger,  long,  leaf¬ 
shaped,  and  keen,  of  marvellous  workmanship,  damasked 
with  serpent-forms  in  red  and  gold.
Good  night,  Frodo!
Sheep  walked 
for  a  while  biting  the  grass,  but  soon  the  hills  were  empty 
again.
Across  the  Bridge,  up  a  broad  stair, 
along  a  wide  road,  through  the  First  Hall,  and  out!
Therefore  they  were  called  the  Galadhrim,  the  Tree-people.
STRIDER 


215 


On  Monday  one  came  down  the  Greenway,  they  say;  and 
another  appeared  later,  coming  up  the  Greenway  from  the 
south.’ 

There  was  a  silence.
But  on  him  mighty  doom  was  laid, 
till  Moon  should  fade,  an  orbed  star 
to  pass,  and  tarry  never  more 


308 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


on  Hither  Shores  where  mortals  are; 
for  ever  still  a  herald  on 
an  errand  that  should  never  rest 
to  bear  his  shining  lamp  afar, 
the  Flammifer  of  Westernesse.
We  feared  then  that 
he  had  some  news  of  it  that  we  knew  nothing  of.
They  love  their  horses  next  to  their  kin.
But  he’s  afraid.
The  Men  of  Minas  Tirith  are  true  to  their 
word.’  But  what  he  thought  that  the  Lady  had  offered  him 
Boromir  did  not  tell.
‘You 
shouldn’t  sit  in  such  a  place,  if  you  feel  sleepy.’ 

‘What  about  the  others?’  Frodo  asked.
They 
could  all  see  him  standing,  waving  one  hand  in  the  air,  the 
other  was  in  his  trouser-pocket.